ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


Preparatory Commission for the Entry into Force of
the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and
Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas
beyond National Jurisdiction and the Convening of the
First Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Agreement
Third session
New York, 23 March–2 April 2026


                Consolidated draft study on the technical aspects of the
                operationalization of the Clearing-House Mechanism under
                the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the
                Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of
                Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National
                Jurisdiction
                Background

                1. The Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
                Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond
                National Jurisdiction (BBNJ Agreement) establishes a Clearing-House Mechanism (the
                Mechanism) and provides for its various functions. The specific modalities for the
                operation of the Mechanism will be determined by the Conference of the Parties to the
                Agreement.
                2. In resolution 78/272 of 24 April 2024, the General Assembly established a
                Preparatory Commission to prepare for the entry into force of the BBNJ Agreement and
                the convening of the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Agreement.
                The programme of work of the Commission is based on three clusters of issues discussed
                during the organizational meeting of the Commission, held in June 2024. One of these
                clusters addresses issues pertaining to the operation of the Mechanism, including the
                modalities for its operation, such as: (a) the type, architecture and functionalities of the
                platform; (b) the process for generating the “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier; (c)
                modalities to facilitate the matching of capacity-building needs with the support
                available and with providers for the transfer of marine technology, and to facilitate
                access to related know-how and expertise; and (d) terms of cooperation with relevant
                legal instruments and frameworks and relevant global, regional, subregional and sectoral
                bodies.
                3. Pursuant to resolution 78/272, the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
                through the Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations and the Division, is providing
                the Preparatory Commission with the assistance necessary for the performance of its
                work, including the provision of essential background information and relevant
                documents. In that context, the Preparatory Commission considered, at its first session,
                held in April 2025, issues pertaining to the operation of the Mechanism under the
                Agreement, on the basis of a note by the Secretariat (A/AC.296/2025/6).
                4. With a view to providing essential background information to further support the
                work of the Commission with regard to issues pertaining to the Mechanism, the present
                study on the technical aspects of the operationalization of the Mechanism under the
                BBNJ Agreement (the Study) was prepared through a consultancy under the supervision
                of the Division.

                                                                                                               1/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


           5. The Study consists of four parts: (a) a stock-take study of existing clearing-house
           mechanism and information exchange systems, including safeguards for traditional
           knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and local communities, resources such as human
           resources, and cost-benefit analysis; (b) a compilation of options to address technical
           requirements for the Mechanism; (c) a draft roadmap for the phased operationalization
           of the Mechanism; and (d) a draft workplan for the initial phase for the operationalization
           of the Mechanism.

           Part (a)
           Stock-take study of existing clearing-house mechanisms and
           information exchange systems

      I.   Introduction
           6.    The stock-take study in Part (a) is based on desktop research and input provided
           by delegations to the Preparatory Commission, including through written submissions
           to inform the Study and interviews.
           7.    Section II of Part (a) provides a stock-take study of the existing clearing-house
           mechanisms and information exchange systems. There are two distinct categories of
           data, information, and documents that are relevant for the BBNJ Agreement. First,
           implementation of the BBNJ Agreement will generate data, information, and documents,
           therefore, the Mechanism would need to serve the function of a centralized platform that
           will “enable Parties to access, provide and disseminate information” of the four
           substantive elements (article 51, paragraph 3, subparagraphs (i) to (iv)). Second, the
           BBNJ Agreement requires that the Mechanism provide links to “relevant global,
           regional, subregional, national and sectoral clearing-house mechanisms and other gene
           banks, repositories and databases, including those pertaining to relevant traditional
           knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and local communities, and promote, where possible,
           links with publicly available private and non-governmental platforms for the exchange
           of information” (article 51, paragraph 3, subparagraph (c)). Thus, a hybrid of the so-
           called “centralized” and a “federated” model could be considered for the Mechanism,
           based on the two distinct but interrelated aspects of the needs associated with the
           implementation of the BBNJ Agreement. Section III provides considerations of rel evant
           information sources for the four substantive elements.
           8.    Furthermore, the BBNJ Agreement provides that “full recognition shall be given
           to the special requirements of developing States Parties, as well as the special
           circumstances of small island developing States Parties, and their access to the
           mechanism shall be facilitated to enable those States to utilize it without undue obstacles
           or administrative burdens. Information shall be included on activities to promote
           information-sharing, awareness-raising and dissemination in and with those States, as
           well as to provide specific programmes for those States” (article 51, paragraph 5). To
           ensure that such requirement is considered, section III of Part (a) addresses the
           considerations relating to the special requirements of developing States Parties, as well
           as the special circumstances of small island developing States.
           9.    In relation to the remaining sections in Part (a), section IV explores examples of
           best practices associated with traditional knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and local
           communities; section V discusses examples of best practices on sensitive and
           confidential information, data sovereignty and cyber security; section VI explores
           considerations and different approaches to multilingualism; section VII provides cost-
           benefit analyses of two large and complex information exchange platforms; and section
           VIII outlines how this stock-take study would inform Part (b) of the Study.



                                                                                                         2/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


      II.   Consideration of relevant information sources for the four
            substantive elements
            10. This section considers the relevant information sources for the four substantive
            elements addressed by the BBNJ Agreement:
                 (a)    Marine genetic resources, including the fair and equitable sharing of benefits;
                  (b)   Measures such as area-based management tools, including marine protected
            areas;
                 (c)    Environmental impact assessments; and
                 (d)    Capacity-building and the transfer of marine technology.
            11. The BBNJ Agreement requires the Mechanism to “foster enhanced transparency,
            including by facilitating the sharing of environmental baseline data and information”
            between Parties and other relevant stakeholders (article 51, paragraph 3, subparagraph
            (e)), and as discussed below, the same information source could be used for different
            purposes. Also, the requirement of the Agreement to “facilitate international cooperation
            and collaboration, including scientific and technical cooperation and collaboration”
            (article 51, paragraph 5, subparagraph (f)) is relevant for all four substantive elements.
            Therefore, the same existing information source may provide useful information for
            several elements. In addition, the useful nature of the information source is made on certain
            assumptions, because some of the details will be considered by the subsidiary bodies
            established under the Agreement (e.g., the Scientific and Technical Body, the Access and
            Benefit-Sharing committee, the Capacity-Building and Transfer of Marine Technology
            Committee, etc.) and decided by the Conference of the Parties at or after its first meeting.
            Such assumptions will be discussed where necessary for illustration purposes.
            12. There is a wide range of sources for the types of information and data as discussed
            below. They are generated or held by intergovernmental bodies, regional bodies, sector-
            specific bodies, academic institutions, collections (e.g., natural history museums), non-
            governmental organizations and the private sector. It is important to note that there is
            also variability in the level of access.
      A.    Marine genetic resources, including the fair and equitable sharing of
            benefits
            13. Regarding marine genetic resources of areas beyond national jurisdiction and
            digital sequence information on such resources, the BBNJ Agreement requires that
            Parties ensure that the Mechanism receives notification s prior to collection in situ of
            marine genetic resources of areas beyond national jurisdiction, upon which a “BBNJ”
            standardized batch identifier is automatically generated by the Mechanism. After
            collection in situ of marine genetic resource of areas beyond national jurisdiction, a post-
            collection notification must be submitted to the Mechanism, including information,
            along with the “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier, on the repository or database where
            digital sequence information on marine genetic resources was or would be deposited and
            where all marine genetic resources collected in situ were or would be deposited or held ,
            among other information. It is worth noting that the functions of the Mechanism include
            receiving and maintaining the relevant notifications and generating the “BBNJ”
            standardized batch identifier, but do not including tracking and tracing marine genetic
            resources or digital sequence information.
            14. In terms of repositories for physical samples of marine genetic resources, scientists
            use various biobanks and collection institutions. The Global Genome Biodiversity
            Network (GGBN) is a network of biodiversity repositories comprising 119 member
            repositories, with data providing members in the following States: Brazil, China,
            Colombia, Czechia, Ecuador, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Israel, Mexico, New
            Zealand, Peru, Poland, South Africa, Spain, Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great
                                                                                                            3/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          Britan and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America. It aims to promote quality
          standards, improve practices, support interoperability and harmonize exchange of
          material in accordance with national legislations and international conventions. At the
          regional level, the European Marine Biological Resource Centre (EMBRC) connects
          institutions from nine countries. The Asian Network of Research Resource Centers
          (ANRRC) promotes cooperation between biobanks in China, Japan, the Republic of
          Korea and Southeast Asia. The International Seabed Authority (ISA) launched the Deep -
          Sea Biobank Initiative in June 2025 to enhance access to deep-sea biological samples
          and genetic data collected from the Area.
          15. With regard to marine biodiversity data, scientists commonly use the Ocean
          Biodiversity Information System (OBIS), which is the world’s largest open-access
          repository of marine biodiversity data. The system hosts various types of data, including
          taxonomic data, occurrence data, environmental data, metadata and biological details.
          OBIS operates globally, with thirty regional and seven thematic nodes, representing over
          1,000 institutions and over 6,000 scientists and data managers from 99 countries. OBIS
          collaborates with numerous partners, including the Partnership for Observation of the
          Global Ocean (POGO), the Global Ocean Observation System (GOOS), the Global
          Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) and the Marine Biodiversity Observation
          Network (MBON), and contributes to initiatives such as the European Marine
          Observation and Data Network (EMODnet) and Pacific islands Marine bioinvasions
          Alert Network (PacMAN).
          16. For digital sequence information, the International Nucleotide Sequence Database
          Collaboration (INSDC) is a long-standing partnership among three primary databases
          that exchange data every 24 hours to ensure identical content:
               (a) GenBank, managed by the National Center for Biotechnology Information of
          the United States of America;
                (b) European Nucleotide Archive, managed by the European Bioinformatics
          Institute; and
               (c)   DNA Data Bank of Japan, managed by the National Institute of Genetics of
          Japan.
          17. Approximately 95 per cent of other biological databases dealing with digital
          sequence information directly link to, or download their data from, the INSDC. These
          databases assign unique accession numbers to sequences. Other digital sequence
          information and genomic repositories include the China National GenBank and National
          Genomics Data Center of China, which collaborate with INSDC. INSDC is preparing to
          integrate the “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier into its existing infrastructure by
          utilizing free-text metadata fields where submitters currently enter cruise identifier. That
          said, INSDC would not enforce the requirement; responsibility for compliance would
          rest with the submitter. Interoperability with INSDC would benefit the Mechanism.
          18. The BBNJ Agreement also requires notification to be submitted to the Mechanism
          where marine genetic resources of areas beyond national jurisdiction, and where
          practicable, the digital sequence information on such resources are subject to utilization,
          including commercialization. Such notification would need to include information,
          including the “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier, if available, on where the results of
          the utilization, such as publications, patents granted, if available and to the extent
          possible, and products developed, can be found, among other information. Examples of
          databases where information on utilized DNA may be found include UniProt (for protein
          sequence and functional information), as well as PubChem and ChEMBL (for small
          molecules and bioactive compounds). Data from three major patent offices, namely the
          United States Patent and Trademark Office, the European Patent Office and the Japan
          Patent Office, relating to patent applications containing biological sequences ultimately
          flow into INSDC.
                                                                                                         4/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


           19. OBIS is planning to pilot test a concept for the management of “BBNJ”
           standardized batch identifier with GenBank (an INSDC member). This pilot aims to
           demonstrate how such identifier could function technically by linking scientific data and
           digital object identifiers across systems.
      B.   Measures such as area-based management tools, including marine
           protected areas
           20. The Agreement requires that the Mechanism serve as a centralized platform for
           accessing, providing and disseminating information on the establishment and
           implementation of area-based management tools, including marine protected areas. This
           may include supporting collaboration and consultations on the development of proposals
           for such areas, receiving proposals and making them publicly available, receiving input
           during consultations on such proposals and during consultations to enhance cooperation
           and coordination with relevant instruments, frameworks and bodies, making decisions
           of the Conference of the Parties and objections thereto publicly available, receiving and
           making publicly available reports and information on the implementation of area-based
           management tools, including marine protected areas, and providing general information
           on such tools.
           21. One practical approach to conceptualize data related to measures such as area-
           based management tools, including marine protected areas is to consider three
           intersecting dimensions: first, the system to which the data relate (natural systems,
           human uses or governance arrangements); second, the form of the data (observed,
           modeled or derived, or administratively reported; and third, the level of access
           associated with the data (open, conditional or aggregated, or restricted). Any dataset
           relevant to the implementation of the BBNJ Agreement can be situated within this
           conceptual space, making explicit both its informational value and its limitations.
           22. The use of such a data typology could help streamline the operationalization of the
           Mechanism with a more strategic focus on supporting decision-making. This approach
           may help clarify which types of data are most relevant at different stages of the processes
           relating to area-based management tools under the BBNJ Agreement, highlight where
           capacity-building efforts should prioritize analytical and integrative capabilities rather
           than raw data collection, and reinforce the idea that the primary function of the
           Mechanism is to support informed decision-making rather than to centralize control over
           ocean data. Such a conceptual framework may also help position the Mechanism as an
           effective interface between science, policy and governance, leveraging existing
           databases, information systems, and clearing-house mechanisms while respecting
           established mandates and sensitivities under the BBNJ Agreement. For the purpose of
           the present stock-take study, the first and third dimensions, namely the system to which
           the data relates and the level of access associated with the data, are explored.
           23. For area-based management tools, including marine protected areas, the typology
           of data could be categorized in the three following groups:
                (a) Natural systems: species occurrence and abundance; species distribution
           models, movement and ecological connectivity; genetic and genomic data,
           oceanography and bathymetry, and observed and modeled ecological data;
                (b) Human uses and pressures: fisheries activities and effort; shipping and
           maritime traffic; seabed activities; submarine cables and infrastructure; observed and
           reported human-use data; and
                 (c) Governance and management: existing area-based management tools,
           including marine protected areas; spatial closures and regulations; maritime spaces
           limits and boundaries; institutional mandates; administrative and legal requirements.
           24. Some widely used information systems and databases, such as the Ocean
           Biodiversity Information System (OBIS), the Global Biodiversity Framework Institute
                                                                                                         5/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          (GBIF), AquaMaps, Movebank, the International Nucleotide Sequence Data Coalition
          (INSDC), the General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO), the Global Ocean
          Observing System (GOOS), and the Copernicus Marine Service, provide globally,
          regionally and nationally relevant data and information via open access on species
          occurrences, modeled distributions, movement ecology, genetic diversity, and
          oceanographic conditions. The data and information they provide could support the
          establishment of ecological baselines, and the assessment of ecological representativity
          and connectivity. Such information and data may also support processes relating to the
          identification of areas for area-based management tools, as well as the establishment and
          monitoring of such tools.
          25. Other sources of data relevant for area-based management tools, including marine
          protected areas, are held by States or intergovernmental bodies with sector-specific
          mandates, such as:
               (a) Fisheries data collected by the Food and Agricultural Organizations of the
          United Nations (FAO) and regional fisheries management organizations, including
          systems such as the Vulnerable Marine Ecosystem (VME) Database, the Fisheries and
          Resources Monitoring System (FIRMS), and the Global Information Exchange System; 1
                (b) Geological or environmental data generated through seabed exploration
          activities under the International Seabed Authority, including the Deep Seabed and
          Ocean Database (DeepData), and the Deep-sea Biobank Initiative; and
               (c) Maritime regulatory information held by the International Maritime
          Organization (IMO), including the Global Integrated Shipping Information System
          (GISIS).
          26. Access to fisheries data is subject to agreed criteria established by the providing
          State and FAO. Nevertheless, organizations such as the International Council for the
          Exploration of the Sea (ICES), the North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES)
          and the Pacific Community (SPC) use fisheries data released by FAO to provide open-
          access conservation analysis. The Convention for the Protection of the Marine
          Environment of the North-East Atlantic (OSPAR) uses data from its Parties to provide a
          wide range of information via open access through its OSPAR Data and Information
          Management System (ODIMS), including on biodiversity, area-based management,
          hazardous substances and eutrophication, radioactive substances, and human activities.
          For species and habitats, OSPAR supplements its own datasets with data from OBIS and
          GBIF to improve quality. While information held by the Commission for the
          Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) could be informative,
          that commission indicated that, in the absence of a formal decision by its governing body
          regarding engagement with the BBNJ Agreement, it should be assumed that their
          publicly available information remains accessible only through the CCAMLR website
          and may therefore only be referenced.
          27. Another category consists of data generated or curated by commercial or quasi-
          commercial entities, including satellite analytics providers and information systems such
          as the Global Fishing Watch, which offer high-temporal-resolution and near-real-time
          insights into human activities at sea, and automatic identification systems (AIS), which
          provide datasets containing shipping location data, destinations, and historical vessel
          positions. Some AIS-based information systems, such as the Marine Traffic and
          VesselFinder applications, provide limited free access, while more comprehensive
          information, including satellite-based tracking is available through paid subscriptions.
          Similarly, the IMO-Vega Database provides a comprehensive digital database of
          historical and current maritime regulations, but access is based on paid subscriptions.
          Access to more detailed datasets relevant to monitoring, compliance support and the

          1
           FAO recommends that FIRMS serve as the primary source for fisheries-related data, given the
          data sovereignty and confidentiality considerations inherent to fisheries management.
                                                                                                         6/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


               evaluation of the effectiveness of area-based management tools, including marine
               protected areas, from commercial or quasi-commercial entities would likely require
               licensing agreements or partnerships.
               28. The final category consists of a large volume of ecologically significant data and
               information held across academic institutions, museums, and individual research
               projects, including historical specimen records, data from research expeditions,
               telemetry studies, and unpublished or non-standardized datasets. These so-called “long-
               tail” data may be particularly important in data-scarce regions and for understudied taxa,
               such as deep-sea species, migratory megafauna and seamount-associated communities.
               In this context, the role of the Mechanism would be less about centralized data storage
               and more on improving discoverability, signaling where relevant information and data
               exist and under what conditions they may be accessed or reused. Data and information
               generated through the implementation of the BBNJ Agreement could help capture some
               of this information in a more standardized manner. As for existing “long-tail” data, the
               Scientific and Technical Body could conduct outreach to explore whether and how such
               data and information may be referenced in the Mechanism.
               29. Table 1 below provides an illustrative overview of data and information sources
               relevant to area-based management tools, including marine protected areas, and reflects
               the requirement of the Agreement for the Mechanism to facilitate the sharing of
               environmental baseline data and information between Parties and other relevant
               stakeholders, as well as to facilitate international cooperation and collaboration,
               including scientific and technical cooperation and collaboration.

  Table 1.
  Illustrative data and information sources relevant to area-based management tools, including
  marine protected areas
      Data category        Data and information type               Illustrative sources                    Primary use case
    Natural system     Species occurrence and          OBIS, GBIF, FIRMS, WCPFC, NEAFC,          Ecological baselines;
                       abundance                       SPC, ICES, PICES, OSPAR, World Ocean      biodiversity hotspots
                                                       Database (WOD), GGBN
    Natural system     Species distribution models     OBIS, AquaMaps, FIRMS, OSPAR              Representativity; gap analysis;
                       and habitat suitability                                                   identification of areas for area-
                                                                                                 based management tools
    Natural system     Movement and connectivity       Movebank, Migratory Connectivity in the   Network design; migratory
                       data                            Ocean (MiCO), telemetry studies, WCPFC    corridors
    Natural system     Genetic and population          INSDC, eBioAtlas                          Defining management units;
                       structure data                                                            transboundary justification
    Natural system     Abiotic and oceanographic       GEBCO, Copernicus, GOOS,                  Environmental context; climate
                       data                            WOD, World Ocean Atlas                    sensitivity
    Human uses and     Fisheries activity and effort   FIRMS, WCPFC, NEAFC, ICES, PICES,         Cumulative impacts
    pressures                                          SPC, OSPAR,
                                                       AIS, Global Fishing Watch, port
                                                       authorities
    Human uses and     Shipping and maritime traffic   AIS, WCPFC, Global Fishing Watch, port    Ship strikes; noise impacts
    pressures                                          authorities,
    Human uses and     Seabed activities and           DeepData, Deep-Sea Biobank Initiative,    Scoping; cumulative impacts
    pressures          infrastructure                  TeleGeography
    Governance and     Existing area-based             MPAtlas, Protected Planet, VME            Identifying gaps and overlaps
    management         management tools and spatial    Databases (FAO &
                       measures                        regional)
    Governance and     Legal and related information   BBNJ Agreement website and other UN       Jurisdictional analysis
    management         (e.g., meetings, documents,     DOALOS websites (such as the maritime
                       etc.) and maritime spaces       space database), VME Databases (FAO &
                       limits and boundaries           regional), InforMEA, IMO-Vega,
                                                       Protected Seas




                                                                                                                                     7/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


       C.     Environmental impact assessment
              30. The Agreement contains various provisions specifying the functions of the
              Mechanism in relation to environmental impact assessments, which include receiving
              and making available information and reports on assessments conducted under a Party’s
              national process; publishing reports on assessments conducted under relevant
              instruments, frameworks and bodies; making relevant information on screening publicly
              available; making publicly available the views registered by Parties on the potential
              impacts of a planned activity and recommendations of the Scientific and Technical Body;
              publishing public notifications of planned activities; making draft assessment reports
              available during the public consultation process and publishing assessment reports;
              making decision documents on planned activities public; making monitoring reports
              public; publishing notifications of significant adverse impacts of authorized activities;
              making publicly available concerns registered by Parties that the authorized activity may
              have significant adverse impacts, any notifications issued and any recommendations by
              the Scientific and Technical Body; keeping States and stakeholders informed in the
              monitoring, reporting and review processes; and publishing reports on the review of the
              impacts of authorized activities and decision documents on changes to authorization
              decisions.
              31. The typology of data discussed above could also be relevant for environmental
              impact assessments, subject to the advice of the Scientific and Technical Body, decision
              by the Conference of the Parties, and their implementation by Parties. While the sources
              of information and data may be the same or similar, the primary use thereof may differ.
              Area-based management tools, including marine protected areas, rely on such
              information and data to establish ecological baselines and identify biodiversity hotspots
              to determine whether a particular area in areas beyond national jurisdiction would
              require management or protection. Environmental impact assessments, in contrast, use
              similar information and data to determine, prior to a planned activity taking place,
              whether the planned activity may cause harm to the marine environment. In the latter
              context, environmental baseline information, such as species occurrence, ecological
              representativity and connectivity, and human-use data, would be valuable. The
              information sources identified in the section above as relevant to area-based
              management tools, including marine protected areas, may therefore also be relevant to
              environmental impact assessments.
              32. In summary, table 2 below illustrates how selected types of data are used
              differently in the context of area-based management tools, including marine protected
              areas, and environmental impact assessments.
  Table 2.
  Illustrative differences in the primary use of selected data types for area-based management
  tools, including marine protected areas, and for environmental impact assessments
              Data category           Primary use for area-based management tools, including                     Primary use for
                                                      marine protected areas                             environmental impact assessment
    Species distribution models and   Establish ecological baselines and identify              Determine if sensitive species are in the
    habitat suitability products      biodiversity hotspots                                    direct area of a planned activity
    Movement and connectivity         Support the design of ecologically coherent              Assess whether sensitive species or
                                      networks of area-based management tools,                 ecological linkages may be impacted
                                      including marine protected areas
    Genetic and genomic data          Provide information on population structure,             Assess the resilience and adaptive capacity
                                      levels of gene flow and evolutionary                     of populations under environmental change
                                      connectivity (e.g., eDNA)
    Abiotic and oceanographic data    Provide environmental context, support
    (including bathymetry, seafloor   predictive modeling, and particularly important          Assess environmental context and
    features and dynamic variables    for anticipating climate-driven shifts in species        cumulative impacts.
    such as temperature)              distributions and ecosystem structure
    Human-use data                    Identify activities to avoid or manage                   Assess potential for substantial harm from
                                                                                               the planned activity

                                                                                                                                             8/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          33. Strategic environmental assessments are used to assess the potential effects of
          plans and programmes relating to activities in areas beyond national jurisdiction (article
          39, paragraph 1). While the Conference of the Parties will develop guidance on the
          conduct of strategic environmental assessments, information similar to that used for
          environmental impact assessments may also be relevant for conducting strategic
          environmental assessments.
          D. Capacity-building and the transfer of marine technology
          34. The Mechanism is required to “facilitate the matching of capacity-building needs
          with the support available and with providers for the transfer of marine technology,
          including governmental, non-governmental or private entities interested in participating
          as donors in the transfer of marine technology, and facilitate access to related know -how
          and expertise” (article 51, paragraph 3, subparagraph (b)). The Mechanism may also
          facilitate the assessment of the needs and priorities of developing States Parties in terms
          of capacity-building and the transfer of marine technology.
          35. The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO (IOC-UNESCO)
          has developed a clearing-house mechanism based on the generation, curation and
          sharing of data and information across several systems, including the Global Ocean
          Observation System (GOOS), the Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS), the
          World Ocean Atlas, the World Ocean Database, the Ocean Teacher Global Academy
          (OTGA), the Ocean Capacity Development Hub (CD Hub) and Ocean Expert. These
          information systems are integrated and made interoperable through the Ocean Data and
          Information System (ODIS) and are accessible through the Ocean InfoHub, which serves
          as a user-facing interface to facilitate access, discovery and reuse of data and resources.
          Of particular relevance for capacity-building and the transfer of marine technology are
          OTGA, which provides online and in-person training opportunities to increase national
          and regional capacity in coastal and marine sciences, services and management ; the CD
          Hub, which hosts information on a wide range of capacity-building opportunities,
          including training higher education programmes, research exchanges, mentorship and
          professional networks, as well as awards, fellowships and grants, among others. Ocean
          Expert, which enables users to identify experts, organizations and potential partners in
          ocean science and management. The information system is also used as an event
          management system for meetings and workshops, and currently hosts information on
          over 3,700 events and over 36,000 documents.
          36. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) is currently rebuilding the
          World Environment Situation Room, which will aggregate real-time geospatial data,
          earth observation data and environmental statistics. InforMEA aggregates decisions,
          treaty texts and national reports from over 20 multilateral environmental agreement
          secretariats. The UNEP-World Conservation Monitoring Centre enables users to search
          and filter datasets by theme. The Data Reporting Tool for Multilateral Environmental
          Agreements (DaRT) provides a workspace for national reporters to organize information
          for reporting across multiple biodiversity-related conventions simultaneously.
          37. In addition to the IOC Ocean InfoHub and the UNEP information systems, table 3
          below provides illustrative examples of existing databases and information systems
          complementing information that may be provided by developed States Parties and
          regional economic integration organizations under the Agreement.




                                                                                                        9/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


  Table 3.
  Illustrative platforms relevant to capacity-building and the transfer of marine technology
       Data category       Subject of capacity-building and the            Illustrative sources                   Primary use case
                              transfer of marine technology
    Capacity-building    Matters associated with the BBNJ         BBNJ Agreement website               Open-access information system
    and funding          Agreement                                (https://www.un.org/bbnjagreeme      on the BBNJ Agreement,
                                                                  nt/en/capacity-building-and-         including information on the
                                                                  technical-assistance/overview)       Agreement, official documents,
                                                                                                       workshops, technical assistance,
                                                                                                       briefings, as well as various tools
                                                                                                       and materials for capacity-
                                                                                                       building and awareness-raising
    Capacity-building    Information on the                       BBNJ IGC website (UN                 Open-access information system
                         Intergovernmental Conference on          DOALOS)                              which provides historic
                         Marine Biological Diversity of           (https://www.un.org/bbnj/)           information on the BBNJ IGC that
                         Areas Beyond National                                                         negotiated and adopted the
                         Jurisdiction (BBNJ IGC)                                                       Agreement
    Capacity-building,   Information on the United Nations        Oceans and Law of the Sea            Open-access information system
    trust funds and      Convention on the Law of the Sea         website (UN DOALOS) (                providing information on the
    fellowships          and the related agreements, as well      https://www.un.org/depts/los/)       United Nations Convention on the
                         as UN DOALOS activities                                                       Law of the Sea and the related
                                                                                                       agreements, the work of the
                                                                                                       United Nations General Assembly
                                                                                                       on oceans and the law of the sea,
                                                                                                       bodies established by the
                                                                                                       Convention, settlement of
                                                                                                       disputes, the functions and
                                                                                                       activities of UN DOALOS, and
                                                                                                       calendar of meetings
    Capacity-building    Information on capacity-building         UN DOALOS capacity-building          Open-access information system
    and trust funds      and trust funds                          website (UN DOALOS)                  providing consolidated
                                                                  (https://www.un.org/oceancapacity/   information on technical
                                                                  )                                    cooperation, fellowships, advisory
                                                                                                       services, studies and guidelines,
                                                                                                       reference collection and databases,
                                                                                                       as well as trust funds administered
                                                                                                       by UN DOALOS, including
                                                                                                       information on funding support
                                                                                                       for developing State
                                                                                                       representatives to participate in
                                                                                                       the BBNJ Preparatory
                                                                                                       Commission meetings (BBNJ
                                                                                                       Trust Fund)
    Capacity-building    Information on inter-agency              UN-Oceans website (UN                Open-access information system
                         coordination on marine and coastal       DOALOS) (https://unsceb.org/un-      providing information on the
                         issues through UN-Oceans                 oceans)                              mandates and work of UN-
                                                                                                       Oceans, including side events
    Capacity-building    Support for ratification and             Global Ocean Programme               Connects States and regional
    support              implementation of the BBNJ               established by the European          intergovernmental organizations
    through experts      Agreement                                Union and Technical Assistance       with high-level expertise through
                                                                  Facility Component 1                 coordinated, needs-based and
                                                                  implemented by the International     targeted support from a list of
                                                                  Union for the Conservation of        approved experts
                                                                  Nature (IUCN)
                                                                  ( https://iucn.org/our-
                                                                  work/oceans-and-
                                                                  coasts/enhancing-capacities-high-
                                                                  seas-conservation)
    Capacity-building    Information to improve tuna and          Common Oceans Program                Open-access information system
                         deep-sea fisheries management by         Knowledge Hub                        providing information on regional
                         strengthening regulatory                 (FAO, United Nations                 and national training programmes
                         frameworks and reducing their            Development Programme (UNDP)         for exchanging experiences and
                         environmental impact                     and UNEP) (                          strengthening cross-sectoral
                                                                  https://www.fao.org/in-              collaboration
                                                                  action/commonoceans/knowledge-
                                                                  hub/en)
    Capacity-building    Information and knowledge                IW: LEARN (funded by Global          Open-access information system
                                                                                                                                           10/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26

       Data category           Subject of capacity-building and the            Illustrative sources                 Primary use case
                                  transfer of marine technology
                             management to support capacity           Environment Facility,              providing information resources
                             development under the Global             implemented by UNDP and            and project information; open
                             Environment Facility (GEF)               UNEP and managed by IOC-           access
                             International Waters focal area          UNESCO) ( https://iwlearn.net/)
    Funding                  Ratification support, enabling           GEF website on BBNJ                Open-access system providing
                             activity guidelines and project          (https://www.thegef.org/what-we-   information on funding for
                             database                                 do/topics/international-           ratification support
                                                                      waters/bbnj)
    Funding            and   Marine research funding                  Ocean Matcher                      Facilitates the matching of
    matching                 opportunities                            (https://www.oceanmatcher.com/)    submissions by donors and
                                                                                                         recipients with the support of
                                                                                                         artificial intelligence and natural
                                                                                                         language processing
    Capacity-building        Partnership opportunities for            Ocean Connector (IOC-UNESCO)       Connects individuals and
    and                      marine conservation that can be          (https://www.oceanmatcher.com/)    institutions needing capacity-
    matching                 matched with partners                                                       building with those offering
                                                                                                         services, focusing on human
                                                                                                         skills, training opportunities,
                                                                                                         workshops, and technical
                                                                                                         mentorship, through staff
                                                                                                         manually reviewing and matching
                                                                                                         requests and partners
    Capacity-building        Data and information to support          GBIF (https://www.gbif.org/)       Open-access compendium of
                             scientific research                                                         some information and data,
                                                                                                         including studies using GBIF data;
                                                                                                         requires that users include
                                                                                                         attribution of access to GBIF; the
                                                                                                         GBIF Secretariat conducts
                                                                                                         literature tracking, which
                                                                                                         identifies research uses and
                                                                                                         citations of biodiversity
                                                                                                         information
    Capacity-building        Development of national                  SHERLOC (UN Office of Drugs        Global knowledge management
                             legislation, including                   and Crime (UNODC)) (               portal sharing electronic resources
                             considerations on enforcement.           https://www.unodc.org/cld/st/hom   and laws on crime, including
                                                                      e.html)                            national jurisprudence, legal
                                                                                                         frameworks, open-access to most
                                                                                                         databases
    Capacity-building        Law enforcement training                 SPARQL / SPARK (UNODC)             Online training modules with
                                                                      (https://elearningunodc.org/)      different tiers of access, including
                                                                                                         open-access training modules on
                                                                                                         anti-corruption, human rights, and
                                                                                                         organized crime, and restricted
                                                                                                         access to certain specialized
                                                                                                         training modules
    Needs Assessment         Maritime technical cooperation           Technical Operations Portal        Functional but manual model for
    and matching on                                                   (IMO)                              the “needs assessment and
    transfer of marine                                                (https://webaccounts.imo.org/Com   matchmaking on marine
    technology                                                        mon/WebLogin.aspx)                 technology transfer”, with States
                                                                                                         submitting specific capacity-
                                                                                                         building needs which are then
                                                                                                         manually matched with funding
                                                                                                         sources and donors



      III.     Considerations relating to the special requirements of developing
               States Parties, as well as the special circumstances of small island
               developing States
               38. Several information systems have taken measures aimed at making their systems
               remain accessible in low-bandwidth environments. For example, The Pacific Islands
               Protected Areas Portal (PIPAP) and the Pacific Community (SPC) Pacific Data Hub
               (PDH) utilize "light" web architecture to mitigate low-bandwidth challenges. The Pacific
               Ocean Portal offers three options to view the base map (i.e. OpenTopoMap, Satellite,
                                                                                                                                            11/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          and SPC OSM) and specifically indicates that the SPC OSM basemap is recommended
          for high performance and faster loading under low-bandwidth conditions. The OSPAR
          Data and Information Management System (ODIMS) prioritizes stability and
          functionality through largely text- and HTML-based design to avoid the loading of heavy
          graphical elements. It was engineered with low computational power requirements and
          operates on a baseline configuration that expands automatically as demand increases.
          The platform used by the Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS) also adopts a
          minimal design to support usability in low-bandwidth conditions.
          39. Some information systems and clearing-house mechanisms have also developed
          mechanisms and processes to support offline accessibility. For example, the Global
          Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) initially operated as a federated network
          requiring real-time queries across multiple nodes. As this approach proved vulnerable to
          connectivity interruptions, GBIF later adopted a centralized indexing system and the use
          of dataset packages that allow users to perform a single download operation, often with
          high compression. Once the data are downloaded, they can be used entirely offline.
          Similarly, the Clearing-House Mechanism under the Convention on Biological Diversity
          (CBD) allows offline submissions via Excel or Word documents which can subsequently
          be uploaded by secretariat staff or helpdesk staff. The Biosafety Clearing-House under
          the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity also
          offers offline data-entry forms.
          40. Addressing human resource constraints may be done in various ways. For example,
          integrating information systems such as InforMEA would allow users to search
          simultaneously across multiple multilateral environmental agreements without
          accessing separate systems. Stakeholders contacted for the purpose of the present Study
          noted that responsive user support, such as a helpdesk providing timely and meaningful
          support, can significantly improve usability, particularly for Parties with limited
          resources. The IMO Technical Operations Portal offers a functional, albeit largely
          manual, example of needs assessment regarding marine technology transfer. The use of
          tools such as the Data Reporting Tool for Multilateral Environmental Agreements (DaRT)
          of UNEP could also help reduce reporting burdens for small island developing States.
          More broadly, intuitive and easy-to-use platforms can help accommodate diverse users.
          The UNEP Global Partnership on Marine Litter platform, which requires user
          registration, provides an example of a system designed to serve a wide range of
          stakeholders.
          41. Various information systems and clearing-house mechanisms also provide targeted
          support for small island developing States. For example, the Access and Benefit-Sharing
          Clearing-House under the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair
          and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on
          Biological Diversity includes modules that assist small island developing States in
          developing legislative frameworks for access and benefit-sharing. OBIS ensures that the
          Pacific-specific nodes provide data relevant to island scales (i.e., data is collected and
          analyzed and is aggregated to represent an entire island and its immediate surround
          coastal waters) so that it will be most useful for local decision-making. The Ocean
          Teacher Global Academy (OTGA) provides remote training opportunities that help
          overcome the geographic isolation faced by many small island developing States. The
          Pacific Islands Protected Areas Portal (PIPAP) was designed specifically to provide
          small island developing States with data and information about protected areas in the
          Pacific Islands, decision making support tools, case studies and how the Secretariat of
          the Pacific Regional Environment Programme can assist in meeting global biodiversity
          targets. The Pacific Climate Change Portal assists small island developing States in
          navigating Green Climate Fund procedures by consolidating relevant data and
          information. The Santiago Network for Loss and Damage also prioritizes requests from
          small island developing States for technical assistance.

                                                                                                       12/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


     IV.   Examples of best practices associated with traditional knowledge of
           Indigenous Peoples and local communities
           42. The Pacific Community (SPC) Pacific Data Hub (PDH) provides one of the most
           robust applications of the Local Contexts framework, which is a global initiative and
           software platform designed to address the unique intellectual property and data
           governance needs of Indigenous Peoples. Within SPC PDH, the use of Local Contexts
           is standardized as part of the regional mandate and is supported by the Pacific Data
           Sovereignty Network. The system is integrated into the regional data ecosystem to
           support Pacific data sovereignty. Sensitive traditional knowledge may be uploaded but
           digitally restricted through tags using the Local Contexts framework. Instead of a binary
           “public or private” classification, datasets may remain visible while access is restricted
           through cultural protocols. For example, a dataset may be tagged as “TK Women
           Restricted”. This approach allows the existence of data to be known while limiting
           access to authorized community members. The Global Biodiversity Information Facility
           (GBIF) is piloting an initiative where Indigenous Peoples apply the “TK and Biocultural
           Labels” developed under the Local Contexts framework. These labels enable
           communities to express conditions for the sharing and engagement with data and
           function as digital provenance metadata that maintain the connection to community
           interest as data move across repositories, thereby helping prevent the disclosure of
           sensitive content. GBIF is currently testing an application programme interface (API) to
           integrate these labels from the Local Contexts Hub into the GBIF portal.
           43. The Access and Benefit-Sharing Clearing-House (ABSCH) under the Nagoya
           Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits
           Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity exempts
           sensitive traditional knowledge from being uploaded. The internationally recognized
           certificate of compliance confirms that permission has been granted, but the traditional
           knowledge itself is not disclosed. In addition, various process-oriented safeguards for
           traditional knowledge may be incorporated into the procedures for submitting
           information to a clearing-house mechanism. For example, in Australia, traditional
           knowledge is managed through permits or contractual arrangements that are not publicly
           available, and public disclosure is permitted only where explicit consent has been
           provided. France employs a two-step process where initial notifications are submitted
           through a national online platform, while the verification of traditional knowledge
           involves on-site consultation with relevant communities. Reporting to the ABSCH
           occurs only after community consent and national authorization have been secured.
           44. GBIF has also established an Indigenous Data Governance Task Group to guide
           the implementation of the Collective Benefit, Authority to Control, Responsibility and
           Ethics (CARE) Principles. The Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment
           of the North-East Atlantic (OSPAR) has similarly incorporated the CARE Principles in
           initiatives relating to traditional knowledge, particularly in its work in the Arctic,
           ensuring that data provenance and licensing respect the interests of data originators.
           45. The Observatory on Principle 10 in Latin America and the Caribbean (The Escazú
           Agreement Observatory) has a clearing-house and central tracking mechanism on
           environmental rights and laws, which provides information in Indigenous languages.
           46. There is increasing recognition of the importance of traditional knowledge of
           Indigenous Peoples and local communities. The Ocean Biodiversity Information System
           (OBIS) and the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) are increasing the integration
           of local and Indigenous knowledge systems into ocean observation. The Biodiversity
           and Ecosystem Services Network (Bes-Net) explicitly values Indigenous and local
           knowledge on par with western science in its assessment processes. The Pacific Ocean
           Portal provides information on physical oceanography and traditional
           voyaging/navigational safety. The Pacific Climate Change Portal documents traditional
           knowledge relating to cyclones and sea-level rise. The Pacific Islands Protected Areas
                                                                                                        13/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


           Portal (PIPAP) maps locally managed marine areas, recognizing traditional tenure over
           government-designated marine protected areas. The Association of Southeast Asian
           Nations (ASEAN) Heritage Parks clearing-house provides data, frameworks and shared
           experiences to manage the protected areas collaboratively among the local communities
           and other stakeholders. The Convention for the Protection, Management and
           Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Eastern African Region (the
           Nairobi Convention) clearing-house considers community-based coastal management as
           a key pillar of the implementation of the Nairobi Convention.

      V.   Examples of practices on sensitive and confidential information,
           cyber security and data sovereignty
           47. The BBNJ Agreement requires the Mechanism to be “primarily of an open-access
           platform” (article 51, paragraph 2), while also requiring that the confidentiality of
           information provided under the Agreement and rights thereto be respected (article 51,
           paragraph 6). In practice, this requires a balance between open access and appropriate
           safeguards for confidential information. Furthermore, cyber security considerations are
           relevant, including risks related to unauthorized access, breaches of confidential
           information, or and the manipulation of data and information. Finally, questions have
           also been raised on whether a fully federated system would shift certain responsibilities
           on data security to the Parties that would need to provide information to the Mechanism
           through their national information systems and/or any other stakeholder that would
           provide information.
           48. Existing information systems and databases use a range of safeguards to manage
           sensitive or confidential information. For example, the International Maritime
           Organization (IMO) requires user registration to ensure that documents reflecting
           ongoing discussions are accessible only to authorized users. The Global Information
           Exchange System (GIES) supporting the Agreement on Port State Measures is only
           accessible to Parties, as it contains compliance and enforcement information. The
           clearing-house mechanisms under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and
           its Nagoya Protocol generally avoid storing confidential contractual information, but,
           instead, hosts internationally recognized certificates of compliance that link to national
           systems where the confidential information resides. Furthermore, those who submit
           information may also state “confidential” in free-text fields to identify sensitive
           information. Platforms such as the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) and
           the Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS) generally do not host confidential
           data. Meanwhile, they may use Darwin Core terms, such as “informationWithheld” and
           “dataGeneralization” to mask precise coordinates of endangered or sensitive species to
           ensure their safety. Data providers may also use licensing options, such as CC0 or CC-
           BY, to maintain control over the data that is publicly released.
           49. Other databases, information systems and clearing house mechanisms also
           incorporate institutional safeguards to support data sovereignty. For the three clearing-
           house mechanisms under the CBD and its protocols, information generally becomes an
           official national record only after validation by the relevant national focal point. Similar
           approach is also used in information systems, such as the focal point network established
           under the United Nations Convention against Cybercrime, which creates a secure
           channel accessible only to designated governmental representatives for the sharing of
           evidence.

     VI.   Multilingualism
           50. Regarding multilingualism, the managers of various information systems,
           databases, and clearing-house mechanisms noted the need for caution on the use of
           artificial intelligence for the translation of technical and legal documents. Although the
           capabilities of artificial intelligence are improving rapidly, concerns remain regarding
                                                                                                          14/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


           accuracy and precision in highly technical or legally sensitive contexts. At the same
           time, a fully human-centered approach to translation, depending on the volume of
           documentation, may be resource-intensive. For example, the International Maritime
           Organization (IMO) operates in three working languages (English, French and Spanish)
           and six official languages. The organization generates two to three thousand documents
           annually and employs between thirty to fifty translators to support this workload.
           51. The Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF)currently supports twelve
           languages through its portal: Arabic, Chinese (Simplified and Traditional), Czech,
           English, French, Japanese, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish and Ukrainian.
           Translations are primarily produced by a global network of volunteer translators. GBIF
           also provides a service for national and thematic nodes to build their own data portals,
           which can be customized to support local languages. Technical documentation and
           training materials are frequently translated into languages such as French and Spanish
           to support capacity-building in different regions.
           52. The Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS) adopts a hybrid approach. Its
           primary information system and interface are predominantly available in English.
           However, similar to GBIF, OBIS operates through a network of national and regional
           nodes, many of which provide portals and user support in local languages to serve their
           local scientific communities. Some documents, including training materials, are often
           available in the official UN languages.

    VII.   Cost-benefit analyses
           53. Based on desk-top research and interviews, the costs associated with the design,
           build, maintenance and improvements of information systems are generally difficult to
           determine precisely, given that they typically evolve over time. For example, the Global
           Plastic Hub, a platform recently developed by the United Nations Environment
           Programme (UNEP) required an initial investment of approximately USD 2,000,000 to
           develop core functionalities and contents, such as compiling knowledge materials and
           preparing data layers. Annual maintenance costs are estimated at approximately USD
           120,000, covering personnel and operational expenses, including partial time
           contributions from a staff member at P-3 level (25 per cent); a national United Nations
           Volunteer (100 per cent), and a software engineer consultant (30 per cent), as well as
           hosting cost.
           54. The Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) provides an example of a
           more complex platform for which information on operational costs is more readily
           available. However, because the platform was developed iteratively over the last 18
           years, precise figures for the total costs of its design, build and maintenance are not
           available. It has been estimated that, for 2023, the core budget of the organization was
           approximately EUR 4 million, of which an estimated EUR 1 million to EUR 1.5 million
           supported the development and operation of its digital infrastructure, depending on how
           activities are categorized. While the GBIF Work Programme for 2023 does not publicly
           provide budgetary documentation, staff time allocations indicate that the priority areas
           include infrastructure and data (31 per cent), community and capacity (29 per cent),
           science and research (27 per cent), and policy and partnership (13 per cent). 2 This
           distribution suggests that expenses associated with infrastructure and data represents
           only part of its overall expenditure. In addition to the core budget, GBIF receives
           supplementary funding from external partners, including the Biodiversity Information




           2
            The report is available at https://docs.gbif.org/2023-work-programme/en/gbif-work-programme-
           2023.en.pdf.
                                                                                                           15/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


               for Development programme of the European Union, which supports specific project-
               based activities.3
               55. The European Bioinformatics Institute of the European Molecular Biology
               Laboratory (EMBL-EBI) provides another example of a large-scale database and an
               information system. It maintains a broad range of freely available biological data
               resources that enable scientists to study genes, proteins and molecular structures, and it
               also conducts computational research and provides specialized training in
               bioinformatics. EMBL-EBI is one of the three founding members of the International
               Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC). According to an independent
               evaluation, the total annual investment required to develop and maintain the fourty-four
               open data resources managed by EMBL-EBI is estimated at approximately GBP 110
               million per year. Many of its data resources are developed through a combination of
               institutional funding and collaborative arrangements, including joint grants, consortium
               agreements (e.g. Protein Data Bank in Europe), direct partnerships (e.g. Reactome), and
               federated models (e.g. European Genome-phenome Archive). Some data resources are
               jointly managed with partner institutions (e.g. UniProt). Of the estimated GBP 110
               million annual investment, approximately GBP 78 million represents direct operational
               expenses, while the remainder reflects financial and in-kind contributions from external
               collaborators and partners. 4
               56. GBIF and EMBL-EBI have also both undergone independent cost-benefit
               assessments. 5 The results show that both platforms generate significant returns on
               investment, though they differ in scale, specific economic methodologies, and the
               magnitude of financial figures reported. that the assessments also identified several
               common findings. First, both platforms were assessed as providing value relative to their
               cost. Second, time savings of researchers were identified as a primary driver of economic
               value. Third, both assessments adopted a counterfactual approach, asking users whether
               their work could be conducted in the absence of the platform. Finally, the assessments
               highlighted broader benefits, including support for the Sustainable Development Goals
               in the case of GBIF and strategic research and development impacts, including rapid
               responses to global challenges such as the COVID-19 pandemic, in the case of EMBL-
               EBI. A comparison of selected indicators from the two assessments is provided in Table
               4 below.
  Table 4.
  Comparison of selected indicators from cost–benefit assessments of EMBL-EBI and GBIF
         Selected Indicators                 EMBL-EBI Assessment (2021)                           GBIF Assessment (2023)
    Annual operational cost      GBP 110 million                                   EUR 15 million
    Direct user value            GBP 1.25 billion (estimated willingness to pay)   EUR 48 million (direct benefits)
    Efficiency or time savings   GBP 2.6 billion – GBP 11 billion                  EUR 35 million (approximately 845,000 hours)
    Cost to benefit ratio        1 : 11 (minimum) to 1 : 102 (maximum)             1 : 3 (user) to 1 : 12 (societal)
    Critical dependency          58 per cent could not obtain data elsewhere       47 per cent could not perform their work without
                                                                                   it
    Unique indicator measured    Avoided duplication of effort (GBP 6 billion      Volunteer contributions (EUR 958,000 value)
                                 value)
    Societal or research and     GBP 2.2 billion annual research and development   EUR 185 million indirect societal benefits
    development impact           return




               3
                 Information about the funding is available at
               https://www.gbif.org/news/4qE7yWIQqUkyGMYVD7Yr4C/eu -renews-funding-for-biodiversity-
               information-for-development-programme.
               4
                 The report by Charles Beagrie Ltd. is available at https://www.embl.org/documents/wp -
               content/uploads/2021/10/EMBL-EBI-impact-report-2021.pdf.
               5
                 The report of GBIF can be obtained at:
               https://www.deloitte.com/au/en/services/economics/perspectives/total -economic-value-open-
               access-database-living-world.html.
                                                                                                                                      16/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


            57. The examples above illustrate that large-scale data-sharing platforms can generate
            substantial benefits relative to their operational costs. While the platforms examined
            may not be directly comparable to the Mechanism, they nevertheless demonstrate the
            potential value of investing in information-sharing platforms that build upon existing
            platforms and networks. The BBNJ Agreement also requires that the Mechanism build
            on global, regional and subregional clearing-house institutions, where applicable, when
            establishing regional and subregional mechanisms under the global mechanism (article
            51, paragraph 3, subparagraph (d)). It will be essential, however, to prioritize which
            systems should be integrated at the initial stage and which could be incorporated
            incrementally. Furthermore, the Mechanism may benefit from developing partnerships
            with existing platforms and exploring opportunities for external support, such as joint
            projects and in-kind contributions.

   VIII.    Considerations for part (b)
            58. The above stock-take study indicates that a critical consideration in the design and
            management of the Mechanism is not only the availability of data and information, but
            also the ability of Parties and other stakeholders to access, interpret and apply such
            information in a coherent and decision-relevant manner. The review of existing systems
            highlights the importance of building upon existing platforms and practices where
            appropriate. Informed by the stock-take study, the compilation of options to address
            technical requirements for the Mechanism in Part (b) focuses on not just what, but how,
            the information is provided in a tiered approach at Appendix A. Further, lessons learned
            from the existing databases, information systems and clearing-house mechanisms
            discussed in part (a) is reflected in the compilation of options in part (b).

            Part (b)
            A compilation of options to address technical requirements for the
            Mechanism

       I.   Introduction
            59. Part (b) of the Study presents three indicative options for the operationalization of
            the Mechanism. Each option is described as an end‑to‑end model, covering the
            architecture, operating model, and oversight and management arrangements, and is
            assessed against a common set of requirements, such as accessibility for developing
            States Parties, including small island developing States, considerations regarding
            safeguards for traditional knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and local communities, the
            implementation of the “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier, and safeguards for
            confidential information. The options differ in the extent and timeframe in which each
            baseline requirements defined below in Section II may be addressed, as well as in their
            potential risks and challenges. Where relevant, the Study draws on findings from the
            stock-take study in Part (a). The objective of Part (b) of the Study is to facilitate the
            comparison of viable models on a consistent basis and to support consideration of a
            pathway that is feasible and scalable over time.

      II.   Overview of baseline requirements common to all options
            60. The Options A through C and possible hybrid configurations presented in section
            V of Part (b) below assume a common baseline of required functionalities and quality or
            safeguard requirements, such as accessibility, security, confidentiality and
            interoperability, which are collectively referred to as “baseline requirements”. The
            requirements discussed in Sections II and III of Part (b) constitute the baseline
            requirements applicable to all options, unless otherwise indicated.


                                                                                                        17/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          61. The following basic functionalities are required for each option for the
          operationalization of the Mechanism, while functionalities specific to the substantive
          elements addressed by the Agreement, which are discussed in paragraph 62 below, would
          operate on top of these basic functionalities:
              (a) Submission and publishing, including structured submission forms,
          document upload and version control;
               (b) Search and retrieval, including basic indexing, filtering, stable record
          pages and persistent links;
                (c) Notifications and alerts, including subscription‑based alerts, deadline
          alerts and summary digests;
               (d) User management capabilities, including role‑based access control, audit
          logging and account lifecycle management;
               (e) Confidentiality controls, including classifications such as public, restricted
          and confidential, together with appropriate enforcement mechanisms; and
               (f) Reporting and data export, including basic export functionalities for Parties
          and subsidiary bodies (e.g., CSV, JSON, PDF, Word and Excel formats).
          62. Functionalities specific to the substantive elements addressed by the Agreement
          include the following:
               (a) Functionalities specific to marine genetic resources, including the fair and
          equitable sharing of benefits, including:
               (i) Receipt, storage and searchability of pre-collection notification, and the
               triggering of automatic alerts when a pre-collection notification is submitted or
               updated;
               (ii) Basic procedural checks of pre-collection notifications (e.g., automated
               completeness or schema checks, in accordance with modalities as may be
               determined by the Conference of the Parties) and the generation of the “BBNJ”
               standardized batch identifier upon receipt of a pre-collection notification that
               meets those requirements;
               (iii) Receipt, storage and searchability of notifications of material changes to pre-
               collection notifications;
               (iv) Receipt, storage and searchability of post-collection notifications and
               notifications at the stage of utilization;
               (v) Receipt, storage and searchability of information received from Parties,
               including measures taken and national focal points;
               (vi) Receipt, storage and searchability of periodic reports submitted by the Parties
               to the Access and Benefit-Sharing Committee regarding activities with respect to
               marine genetic resources and digital sequence information in accordance with
               modalities as may be determined by the Conference of the Parties;
               (vii) Receipt, storage and searchability of information on traditional knowledge
               associated with marine genetic resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction in
               accordance with modalities as may be determined by the Conference of the Parties;
               and
               (viii) Functionalities that support collaboration, such as structured submissions,
               versioned document uploads, threaded comments, automated alerts or deadline
               reminders.
               (b) Functionalities specific to area-based management tools, including marine
          protected areas, including:
                                                                                                       18/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


               (i) Receipt, publication and searchability of public notifications relating to area-
               based management tools, including marine protected areas, and associated
               documentation, in accordance with modalities as may be determined by the
               Conference of the Parties, such as proposals and supporting documentation,
               consultation materials, adopted measures and relevant updates, including basic
               geographic tagging, where applicable, and alerts for key milestones and deadlines;
               and
               (ii) Functionality that supports collaboration, which may include role‑based
               access for Parties and relevant instruments, frameworks and bodies, as appropriate,
               versioned document uploads, threaded comments or question-and-answer features
               during consultations, and automatic milestone or deadline alerts.
               (c)   Functionalities specific to environmental impact assessments, including:
               (i) Receipt, publication and searchability of information on screening, including
               decisions that an environmental impact assessment is not required for planned
               activities;
               (ii) Receipt, publication and searchability of information on views registered by
               Parties on potential impacts of a planned activity and recommendations of the
               Scientific and Technical Body;
               (iii) Receipt, publication and searchability of notifications of planned activities ;
               (iv) Receipt, publication and searchability of opportunities for participation in the
               environmental impact assessment processes;
               (v) Receipt, publication and searchability of draft environmental impact
               assessment reports made available during the public consultation processes;
               (vi) Receipt, publication and searchability of information for stakeholders in the
               monitoring, reporting and review processes;
               (vii) Receipt, publication and searchability of notifications issued regarding
               concerns registered by Parties that the authorized activity may have significant
               adverse impacts and any recommendations by the Scientific and Technical Body;
               (viii) Receipt, publication and searchability of environmental impact assessment
               reports;
               (ix) Receipt, publication and searchability of decision documents on planned
               activities;
               (x)   Receipt, publication and searchability of monitoring reports;
               (xi) Receipt, publication and searchability of notifications of significant adverse
               impacts of authorized activities;
               (xii) Receipt, publication and searchability of reports on the review of the impacts
               of authorized activities and decision documents on changes to authorization
               decisions; and
               (xiii) Functionalities that support collaboration, such as structured submissions,
               versioned document uploads, threaded comments, automated alerts or deadline
               reminders.
               (d) Functionalities specific to capacity-building and the transfer of marine
          technology, including:
               (i) Facilitation of the assessments of needs and priorities of developing States
               Parties and the matching of capacity-building needs with the support available and
               with providers of the transfer of marine technology, which may include enabling
               Parties and stakeholders to articulate capacity-building needs through supporting
                                                                                                       19/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


               templates, guidance and training, make public needs and offers, and make them
               discoverable through filters, keyword search and summary digests, including
               opportunities for training and technical assistance and relevant points of contact,
               with subscription-based alerts to reduce user burden; and
               (ii) Functionality that support collaboration, such as structured submissions,
               versioned document uploads, threaded comments, automated alerts or deadline
               reminders.
               (e)   Functionalities specific to cross-cutting issues, including:
               (i) Provision of core secretariat information and user support services, including
               notices of meetings, calendars and timelines, official documentation and templates
               relevant to Agreement-related workflows;
               (ii) Publication, maintenance and searchability of documentation of the
               Conference of the Parties;
               (iii) Publication, maintenance and searchability of information on documentation
               of the subsidiary bodies;
               (iv) Functionality that support collaboration, such as structured submissions,
               versioned document uploads, threaded comments, automated alerts or deadline
               reminders; and
               (v) Publication, maintenance and searchability of information on financial
               support, such as trust funds, funding opportunities, calls for support, eligibility and
               application information, and deadlines, including alerts for time‑bound
               opportunities.
          63. The following aspects are also included in the baseline technical requirements of
          each option and are discussed in section III of Part (b) below:
               (a) Technical design requirements, such as ensuring that the Mechanism can
          work in areas with low connectivity or other access constraints, targeted alert systems,
          including proximity-based notification systems, and other characteristics as requested
          by delegations at the first and second sessions of the Preparatory Commission;
               (b) The generation and use of the “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier to
          operationalize the relevant provisions of Part II of the Agreement;
                (c) The most appropriate user system with differentiated access, possible
          verification and validation processes to achieve transparency in view of the objective of
          the Agreement;
               (d)   The role that regional or subregional nodes could play in the Mechanism;
                (e) Ensuring accessibility, including through a user-friendly interface, including
          tools for uploading and downloading notifications required under the Agreement;
               (f)   Safeguards for the management of confidential information;
                (g) Ensuring that the sharing of traditional knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and
          local communities is done appropriately, including recognizing and respecting free, prior
          and informed consent and other relevant rights associated with that knowledge,
          particularly those of Indigenous Peoples, including in light of lessons learned on how
          other databases, repositories, etc., have addressed sharing of traditional knowledge and
          protection; and
               (h) Enabling interoperability with clearing-house mechanisms and databases of
          relevant instruments, frameworks and bodies, including at the subregional level.
          64. The consideration of any other technical design requirements that may arise in the
          operationalization of the functions of the Mechanism, including in relation to specific
                                                                                                         20/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


            modalities for the operation of the Mechanism that may need to be determined by the
            Conference of the Parties at its first meeting is addressed in Section VI of Part (b).

     III.   Baseline requirements for the aspects outlined in the terms of
            reference for the Study
            Targeted alert systems, including any proximity‑based notification systems
            65. The Mechanism could incorporate three alert modes as built-in features, enabling
            users to select the option that best suits their needs in a given use case. Implementing
            and maintaining these modes may entail different levels of cost and technical
            complexity:
                 (a) Subscriptions by topic: users subscribe to substantive elements, themes,
            keywords, tags and procedural stages, such as the scoping stage during an environmental
            impact assessment, the publication of a draft environmental impact assessment report or
            monitoring reports;
                  (b) Subscriptions by geography (proximity‑based): alerts are triggered when an
            activity footprint intersects a user‑defined area of interest or buffer zone , such as
            adjacent zones or other configured polygons; and
                 (c) Digests: weekly (or configurable) summary reports tailored to user
            subscriptions, aimed at reducing human workload and information overload.
            66. Minimum viable proximity-based alerts could initially be implemented through
            simple geofencing (areas of interest defined as polygons with buffered intersections) and
            progressively enhanced through improved geospatial tooling, higher-resolution
            boundaries, and performance optimization.
            Accessibility requirements (including low connectivity)
            67. The Mechanism could be designed to support use under low‑bandwidth conditions,
            including minimal user interactions, lightweight pages, and text‑first navigation options.
            To avoid centralizing access and to ensure usable performance for geographically remote
            users, including those in small island developing States, the Mechanism could be hosted
            on off‑premise, cloud‑based infrastructure with multi‑region availability and a
            content‑delivery layer (e.g., regional mirror servers or edge nodes, similar to those used
            by content delivery networks). This would allow public content and core services to be
            delivered from locations closer to users, thereby reducing latency and improving
            resilience in the event of disruptions affecting any single location. This hosting posture
            could include high availability and disaster‑recovery capabilities as baseline design
            assumptions.
            68. The Mechanism could also support offline continuity for data entry, at a minimum
            through “save as draft” functionality and template‑based offline completion, and, where
            feasible, through queued submissions with synchronization when connected. Workflows
            could be mobile‑tolerant so that forms and uploads are usable on commonly available
            devices. Multilingual navigation and core workflows could be provided, together with a
            clear translation policy for submitted documents. The Mechanism could also provide
            user support through a helpdesk function (e.g., ticketing and email support with
            scheduled support hours), complemented by training materials and guided walkthroughs.
            These features would be in line with the practices discussed in Part (a) of the Study.
            “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier
            69. The Mechanism will generate a “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier upon receipt
            of a pre-collection notification. This could be done together with a limited, standardized
            set of core metadata (such as the submitting Party or entity, the date of issuance and a
            high-level description of the planned collection) sufficient to allow the identifier to be
            resolved, understood and linked to related records within the Mechanism.
                                                                                                         21/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          70. The “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier could be envisaged as a globally unique,
          persistent, resolvable and machine-readable identifier, which aligns with the FAIR
          Principles (i.e., findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable). It could be designed as
          a stable identifier whose structure does not change over time, so that it can be referenced
          consistently in external scientific databases and repositories (for example, as a citation
          or metadata field) without requiring those systems t o modify their own identifier
          schemes or workflows. Within the Mechanism, the identifier would link the pre-
          collection notification with the post-collection notification and any subsequent
          notifications at the stage of utilization. The Mechanism could support version control,
          allowing changes to the underlying metadata (e.g., updates to a cruise plan) without
          compromising the integrity or persistence of the identifier.
          71. Different technical approaches to the generation and management of the “BBNJ”
          standardized batch identifier within the Mechanism are possible, and an illustrative
          example is provided for options A and B further discussed below. For option C, the
          technical approaches to the generation and management of the “BBNJ” standardized
          batch identifier may depend on the existing system to be retrofitted.
          User system, verification and validation (transparency by design)
          72. The Mechanism could support differentiated user roles and implement verification
          and validation measures to ensure transparency and reliability. A baseline set of roles
          could include, for example, secretariat administrators, national focal points, designated
          Party users, authorized traditional knowledge account holders, authorized observers, and
          public users (with read‑only access to public content). The differentiation of user roles
          would be subject to decisions by the Conference of the Parties.
          73. Verification of user accounts could include the designation of official users at the
          national level whereby Parties would nominate and approve their own authorized
          accounts, optional domain-based checks such as institutional email verification, and
          two-factor authentication for users with higher level of system privileges.
          74.   Validation procedures for submitted information could include:
               (a) Automated checks, such as verification of required fields, format checks,
          geometry checks for spatial data, and malware scanning, complemented by human
          review for completeness and appropriate classification;
               (b) Optional national approval steps, in particular where domestic rules require
          Party approval before information is published; and
                (c) Clear indication of the status of each submission, for example, whether it is
          in draft form, submitted, published or restricted.
          75. To further support transparency, the Mechanism could include additional tools,
          such as time stamps, version histories, change logs for non‑confidential records, and
          audit logs for access to restricted content.
          Role that regional or subregional nodes could play in the Mechanism
          76. Subject to decisions by the Conference of the Parties, regional or subregional nodes
          could play a role in supporting the operation of the Mechanism, particularly in relation
          to accessibility, user support, outreach and facilitation in low-connectivity or capacity-
          constrained contexts. Such nodes could, for example, assist users in preparing
          submissions, provide training and guidance, or support awareness-raising at regional or
          subregional level.
          77. Regional or subregional nodes could also support the provision of links to relevant
          regional and subregional clearing-house mechanisms and other gene banks, repositories
          and databases, in accordance with Article 51, paragraph 3, subparagraph (c) of the BBNJ
          Agreement. In addition, such nodes may be relevant to the implementation of Article 51,

                                                                                                         22/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          paragraph 3, subparagraph (d) of the BBNJ Agreement, which provides that the
          Mechanism shall build on global, regional and subregional clearing-house institutions,
          where applicable, when establishing regional and subregional mechanisms under the
          global mechanism.
          78. Any use of regional or subregional nodes would be subject to agreed oversight and
          management arrangements and would not necessarily imply decentralization of authority
          for the validation, publication or maintenance of the authoritative record, which could
          remain centralized.
          Uploading and downloading toolkit for notifications and records
          79. To ensure usability, the Mechanism could include tools for both uploading and
          downloading notification‑related information. Possible features could include:
                (a) Upload: structured submission forms for different notification types; options
          for bulk upload where repeated submissions are required; and attachment management,
          including file size controls and compression options;
               (b) Download (human-readable formats): the ability to download individual
          records in formats such as PDF, Excel or Word, to download attachments, or to download
          complete case-file bundle as compression files;
               (c) Download (machine-readable formats): the ability to export record in formats
          such as JSON; bulk export by date range or package element; subscription feeds (e.g.,
          RSS, Atom or email digests); and, where applicable, authenticated application
          programming interfaces for authorized system‑to‑system information exchange; and
               (d) Integrity safeguards: mechanisms such as checksums for downloaded
          bundles and stable version histories for each record.
          Safeguards for the management of confidential information
          80. All options could incorporate a consistent confidentiality framework that balances
          the primarily open-access nature of the Mechanism with the need to protect confidential
          or proprietary information and rights related thereto. Possible elements of such a
          framework could include:
                (a) Classification of information at the time of submission, using public,
          restricted, and confidential or proprietary classifications, supported by a rationale field
          and, where appropriate, an expiry or review date;
                (b) Enforcement of access controls through role‑based permissions with
          least‑privilege defaults, including the separation of confidential storage from public
          information delivery paths;
               (c) Security measures such as encryption in transit and at rest, secure file
          handling, malware scanning, and periodic access reviews;
               (d) Redaction workflows allowing the publication of public versions of records
          while maintaining confidential or proprietary originals in a restricted environment;
               (e) Audit mechanisms, including immutable access logs of access to restricted
          or confidential information, as well as incident response and breach notification
          procedures;
               (f) Retention policies defining archiving policies for confidential or proprietary
          information and secure deletion procedures where required; and
               (g) Protection of personal data by applying privacy-by-design and data-
          minimization approaches, together with alignment with recognized international
          information security standards, such as ISO/IEC 27001 and ISO/IEC 27701 or
          equivalent, consistent with any policies that may be applicable to the secretariat of the

                                                                                                        23/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          Agreement, which will manage the Mechanism, depending on the arrangements for its
          functioning.
          Safeguards for traditional knowledge, including free, prior and informed consent
          81. All options would ensure that traditional knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and
          local communities is handled appropriately. Drawing on the practices discussed in Part
          (a) of the Study, the Mechanism could incorporate the following safeguards:
                (a) Structured recording of consent and rights-related information, including
          free, prior and informed consent, approval or involvement, and any conditions governing
          the access to such knowledge;
                (b) Application of data-minimization approaches, including the option to create
          metadata‑only records with controlled access pathways but without requiring public
          disclosure of the underlying traditional knowledge;
               (c) Alignment of oversight and management arrangements with Indigenous data
          governance principles, such as the CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance
          and support community‑appropriate processes;
               (d) Implementation of access controls tailored to traditional knowledge, including
          permission management, audit logs and controlled access request workflows; and
                (e) Adoption of a “do-no-harm” design approach that avoids default public
          disclosure of traditional knowledge and ensure that access is governed by consent and
          agreed conditions.
          Interoperability with other databases, information systems and clearing-house
          mechanisms
          82. Interoperability with other databases, information systems and clearing-house
          mechanisms could be supported through a tiered approach. All interoperability
          arrangements with external mechanisms and databases would need to be implemented
          in accordance with applicable standards for information and communication
          technologies, such as those of the United Nations, including in relation to software,
          hardware and information security. Possible interoperability modes could include:
               (a) Link mode: provision of authoritative links to external systems, supported by
          consistent metadata and stable identifiers;
                (b) Harvest mode: periodic harvesting of metadata, where permitted by partners,
          allowing the Mechanism to adapt to existing partner protocols without requiring changes
          to those systems;
                (c) Application programming interface federation: deeper system-to-system
          integration through authenticated interfaces, subject to agreed oversight and
          management arrangements and security controls.
          83. Taken together, these modes could improve discoverability, consistency and
          efficiency across systems and, where appropriate, help reduce duplicative reporting by
          enabling data and information submitted in one system to be referenced or reused by
          others.
          84. Interoperability could be supported at global, regional, subregional and sectoral
          levels through agreements such as memoranda of understanding, and through the use of
          common standards, including shared metadata profiles, vocabularies and identifiers.
          External information sources integration framework
          85. Two categories of information are relevant to the Agreement. First, the
          implementation of the Agreement will generate information and documents, and the
          Mechanism will function as a centralized platform to enable Parties to access, provide

                                                                                                    24/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          and disseminate such information. Second, the Agreement requires that the Mechanism
          provide links to relevant global, regional, subregional, national and sectoral mechanisms
          and other gene banks, repositories and databases (including those pertaining to re levant
          traditional knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and local communities), and promote,
          where possible, links with publicly available private and non-governmental platforms.
          In practice, these requirements could lead to a hybrid approach combining centrali zed
          Agreement-related workflows with a federated approach that builds on existing
          databases, information systems, and clearing-house mechanisms.
          86. As discussed in Part (a) of the Study, a critical design consideration will be, first,
          to determine which external information sources should be integrated at the initial stage
          of operationalization and which should be integrated at later stages; and second, to
          define, for each prioritized source, the appropriate access modality and interoperability
          approach. These choices have implications for usability, oversight and management, cost
          and lead time, as further discussed below.
                (a) Access modality (i.e., where the data and information reside): To support
          clear communication with users who may not be familiar with data system design, the
          Mechanism could clearly describe how external data and information is made available
          through it. In this regard, a key distinction is between data and information generated
          pursuant to the Agreement and data and information that already exists elsewhere.
          Depending on where the data and information reside, the Mechanism could apply the
          following access modalities:
               (i) Hosted in the Mechanism. The Mechanism stores and provides access to data
               and information generated pursuant to the Agreement, which may include, records,
               documents and, where appropriate, curated information products. This modality
               provides highest level of control and continuity, with higher operational
               responsibility, including storage, curation, version control, security and long-term
               maintenance.
               (ii) Accessed through federated queries or application programming interfaces:
               The Mechanism retrieves data and information from external databases,
               information systems and clearing-house mechanisms through defined interfaces,
               while the authoritative data remain in the external systems. This modality may
               improve user experience and reduce duplication of data, but may require formal
               agreements, technical standards, secure access arrangements, and ongoing
               coordination.
               (iii) Referenced through metadata and external links: The Mechanism provides a
               stable record page containing key descriptive metadata and an authoritative link
               directing users to the external source where the information is stored. This
               modality has the lowest technical dependency and is fastest to implement, but it
               relies on the continued availability of external databases, information systems and
               clearing-house mechanisms and may provide more limited integrated search and
               analytics, unless supplemented by indexing.
               (iv) Represented through derived products or indicators: The Mechanism
               provides derived summaries, such as contextual layers, indicators and screening
               products, produced from one or more sources, rather than replicating the
               underlying datasets. This modality could support decision-making and reduce user
               burden, but requires transparent provenance, reproducibility expectations and
               careful treatment of licensing and sensitivities.
                (b) Interoperability Modes (i.e., how systems connect): The Mechanism could
          apply a progressive approach to interoperability. These modes describe the technical
          pattern used to connect systems and may be applied across the access modalities
          described above. For example, referenced sources are typically implemented through
          link mode, while federated sources rely on application programming interfaces. The
                                                                                                       25/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          modes listed below are presented in the order of least technically demanding to more
          advanced.
               (i) Link mode (baseline): Authoritative links to external systems are provided
               through consistent metadata, stable identifiers and clear provenance on Mechanism
               record pages. This mode can enable initial connectivity with minimal technical
               complexity and low burden for partner systems.
               (ii) Harvest mode (selective metadata harvesting): The Mechanism periodically
               collects metadata from external systems to support unified search and discovery,
               while authoritative records remain in the source systems. This mode allows users
               to search across multiple connected systems from a single interface, reducing the
               need to navigate separate platforms.
               (iii) Application programming interface federation (deeper system-to-system
               integration): Authenticated and governed integrations through application
               programming interfaces allow deeper technical connections, which can support
               higher-value use cases, such as identifier resolution, automated cross-referencing,
               or controlled exchanges for authorized users, subject to registration, change
               control, and security requirements. This mode is typically used for targeted
               integrations where benefits justify the ongoing effort to operate, maintain, and
               govern the connection over time.
          87. The Mechanism could integrate external information sources progressively, using
          a transparent prioritization approach that supports a scalable “system-of-systems”
          model. Phasing reflects both priorities and the relative complexity of integrating
          different categories of external sources, including oversight and management
          requirements, access constraints and implementation effort. While the same tiered
          structure applies across all three options, the speed and scale of implementation may
          differ. Complexity increases from Tier 1 to Tier 3:
                (a) Tier 1: The objective of Tier 1 would be to establish immediate, low-risk
          connectivity to widely used external data and information sources that support key
          functions of the Mechanism or decision-making under the Agreement, such as those
          supporting notifications on activities with respect to marine genetic resource and digital
          sequence information, contextualizing the establishment of area-based management
          tools and screening during environmental impact assessments, and facilitating capacity-
          building needs and priorities assessment.
               (i) Default interoperability approach: link mode for Tier 1 sources, with limited
               and selective metadata harvesting pilots where appropriate and explicitly permitted
               by partners.
               (ii) Typical characteristics: open access or low operational friction; use of stable
               and well-established identifiers and metadata practices in the source systems; and
               high levels of scientific or community usage.
                (b) Tier 2: The objective of Tier 2 would focus on integrating external databases
          and information systems where access is conditional or require formal arrangements, or
          where technical integration depends on externally governed application programming
          interfaces or data schemas.
               (i) Default interoperability approach: link mode as an initial step, followed by
               metadata harvesting or application programming interface federation once required
               agreements, technical protocols and oversight and management arrangements are
               in place.
               (ii) Typical characteristics: access controlled by the data owner; restrictions on
               copying or automated retrieval of data; confidentiality or mandate limits apply;
               and integration requiring ongoing coordination within system owners.

                                                                                                       26/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


                 (c) Tier 3: The objective of Tier 3 would involve the integration of quasi-
           commercial or licensed information sources and other more complex services where the
           potential benefits are substantial, but integration requires licensing, partnerships, and/or
           sustained operational investment.
                (i) Default interoperability approach: link mode initially, with progression to
                licensed application programming interface federation or the provision of derived
                products or indicators, where permitted by contractual and policy arrangements.
                (ii) Typical characteristics: subscription or licensing terms; variable access
                conditions; potentially high operational and procurement costs; explicit decisions
                by the Conference of the Parties on oversight and management arrangements, as
                well as on resourcing, required.
           88. To avoid repeating database inventories across the option narratives, the
           Mechanism could maintain a single non-exhaustive external source integration matrix.
           The matrix could set out:
                (a)   Recommended external sources foreach tier;
                (b)   The intended access modality, as discussed in paragraph 86(a) above;
                (c)   The intended interoperability mode, as discussed in paragraph 86(b) above; and
                 (d) Key prerequisites, such as standards and identifiers, required agreements,
           licensing arrangements, security controls, update cadence, and partner change control
           arrangements.
           89. An indicative and non-exhaustive external source integration matrix is available in
           Appendix A.

     IV.   Indicative options for the operationalization of the Mechanism
           90. The options presented in this Study, and the hybrid configurations, are intended to
           support decisions on how the Mechanism may be overseen, managed and scaled over
           time. They describe different oversight and management arrangements, including on
           how responsibilities are allocated, how participation is supported, and where
           authoritative control sits.
           91. The three options are presented as complete profiles. Each option combines two
           sets of choices: first, oversight and management arrangements (i.e., a central system
           only, or a central system complemented by nodes); and second, delivery modalities (i.e.,
           a system built specifically for the Mechanism, or one based on retrofitting an existing
           platform). These choices are interlinked and have practical implications for
           responsibilities, capacity requirements, risk management, phasing and delivery
           arrangements. The options are designed to facilitate comparison of how the Mechanism
           could be developed and function in practice, while allowing for hybrid configurations.
           92. The options do not prescribe a fixed IT architecture or detailed system design.
           Rather, they define the operating constraints and service expectations that guide
           engineering decisions, such as how data submission and validation workflows are
           implemented, how notifications are processed and delivered, how access controls are
           applied, how systems are hosted and secured, and how integrations are managed over
           time. For example, more centralized arrangements may be appropriate where uniform
           safeguards, consistent application of rules and clear accountability are required. More
           distributed arrangements may be appropriate where participation barriers are significant
           and closer support to users improves effectiveness, provided that the official record
           remains coherent. Retrofitting existing platforms may be appropriate where required
           functionalities can be adopted without constraining safeguards or workflows.



                                                                                                          27/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          93. From an IT architectural perspective, the Mechanism will primarily be
          implemented through a set of shared platform capabilities that operate across the
          baseline requirements, but are configured to meet function-specific requirements and
          safeguards. These capabilities include user roles and access control; structured
          submission, validation and publication workflows; search and retrieval; notifications
          and alerts; confidentiality handling and auditability; interoperability with external
          systems; reporting and export; and user support and operational services.
          94. Hybrid configurations are included to reflect that the three options need not be
          applied across all functions of the Mechanism. Different capabilities may warrant
          different approaches, provided that responsibilities and lines of authority remain clear
          and the Mechanism functions as a single authoritative system to meet the baseline
          requirements. The illustrative example of a hybrid configuration is therefore a structured
          way to express preferences about responsibilities and lines of authority and support,
          rather than a menu of independent IT architectural features.
          95. Selecting option A, B or C, or a hybrid configuration, does not imply prioritization
          of one substantive element function over another, nor does it predetermine engineering
          decisions. Statements such as “prioritizing accessibility”, when translated into IT
          architectural design, would mean, for example, low-bandwidth design assumptions,
          offline continuity measures, user support arrangements, or alert delivery methods, and
          not when framed as a comparison between oversight and management arrangements.
          The baseline requirements are applicable to all options.
          96. To summarize, the purpose of comparing options is to bridge decisions on
          oversight and management arrangements and delivery modalities, and to facilitate IT
          architectural planning. It provides the basis for defining scope, safeguards, service
          expectations, and operating constraints that a build team or vendor would work within,
          while leaving detailed system design to be developed and validated during the
          operationalization phases (i.e., Phases 1 through 4, see Part (c) of the Study). The options
          framework does not present a choice among fixed architectures, but provides a structured
          way to articulate choices among different oversight and management arrangements and
          delivery modalities, without requiring the specification of IT architectural details at this
          stage.
          97. This section provides an overall summary of three indicative options for the
          operationalization of the Mechanism, accompanied by a comparative reference table. As
          noted above, elements of these options can be combined to form new options. Cost
          assumptions for the options are discussed in Appendix B.
          Baseline requirements
          98. All options are designed to meet the same baseline requirements as outlined in
          Section III of Part (b) above.
          Differences across options
          99. The options differ on how the baseline requirements are addressed, including with
          respect to:
               (a) Where complexity resides (e.g., a single integrated Mechanism, a Mechanism
          designed to have support from regional or subregional nodes from the outset, or a
          Mechanism built on a retrofitted platform with external dependencies);
                (b) When resources are required to introduce additional complexity (e.g., lower
          up-front build complexity with deeper interoperability introduced later, potentially
          requiring refactoring, compared with higher up-front build complexity to make deeper
          interoperability safer and easier to expand earlier);
               (c) Who manages the Mechanism (e.g., the secretariat alone, the secretariat in
          cooperation with entities that manage regional or subregional nodes, or the secretariat
                                                                                                         28/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          in cooperation with entities that manage an existing platform in the case of a retrofit
          option); and
                (d) How each model scales as the number of Parties and authorized users
          increases, as submission and record volumes grow, and as consultation activity expands,
          including whether scaling is handled primarily through the expansion of the capacity of
          the secretariat, distributed support arrangements (i.e., nodes), or operating within the
          potential constraints of a retrofitted platform.
          A simpler way to understand the options
          100. The choice among these three options concerns less individual features and more
          responses to three practical questions:
               (a) Where does the work take place? (i.e., the secretariat, the secretariat plus
          nodes, or through the retrofit of an existing platform);
               (b) How are access and participation supported in practice? (i.e., a central
          helpdesk, regional and subregional support, or platform-based support); and
               (c) How much change management is deferred to later stages? (i.e., introducing
          nodes later, operating nodes from the outset, or managing platform upgrades and
          constraints).
          Factors not suited for feature-by-feature comparison
          101. Certain requirements are reflected across all options, but their meaning and
          practical implications differ depending on the underlying operating model. In these
          areas, a simple feature comparison may create the misleading impression that one option
          has something another option lacks. Examples include:
               (a) Accessibility and low-connectivity requirements: all options meet
          accessibility and low-connectivity requirement; differences relate to whether support is
          provided only by the secretariat or supplemented through regional or subregional nodes;
               (b) Confidentiality safeguards: all options apply varied access controls and audit
          mechanism; differences relate to where review, redaction and staging occur and how
          oversight is exercised across multiple operating environments;
               (c) Safeguards for traditional knowledge: all options support consent-based, non-
          default publication; differences relate to whether oversight, management and facilitation
          can be supported closer to communities; and
               (d) Interoperability: all options initially rely on the link mode discussed in
          paragraph 86(b) above; the options differ in how quickly more integrated connections,
          such as metadata harvesting or application programming interfaces can be introduced,
          which will also depend on how fast the required agreements, access controls and
          technical rules can be established.
          Option A: Central system 6 with minimal dependencies and progressive integration
          102. Under this option, the Mechanism would be operationalized as a central system
          managed by the secretariat that delivers Agreement-related workflows with minimal
          external dependencies. Integration with external information sources would be deepened
          progressively over time, while most scientific and other information would continue to
          reside in existing external platforms.
          103. The complexity of this option sits primarily within the secretariat, including core
          functions, user support and moderation functions. There would be lower complexity up



          6An example of an existing central system is the Global Integrated Shipping Information System
          (GISIS) of the International Maritime Organization .
                                                                                                           29/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          front, with additional complexity introduced later if Parties subsequently decided to
          pursue deeper integration or introduce nodes.
          104. Upon initial operationalization, this option would provide a single public entry
          point for the Mechanism delivering baseline capabilities, including:
                (a) Structured submissions through forms and document uploads, with
          versioning;
               (b) Search and retrieval functionalities, including basic indexing and filtering,
          and stable record pages and links;
              (c) Alerts, including subscriptions by topic or stage, deadline reminders and
          summary digests;
               (d)   User roles and access control, audit logging and account management;
               (e) Confidentiality classification (public, restricted or confidential) with
          enforcement mechanisms;
               (f)   Basic reporting and data exports for Parties and subsidiary bodies;
               (g) Generation of “BBNJ” standardized batch identifiers, including a resolver
          page with minimal metadata for lookup and linkage;
                (h) Low-bandwidth design features (e.g., lightweight pages and minimal user
          interactions) or basic offline continuity (e.g., draft saving and template -based offline
          completion for later upload); and
               (i) Centralized helpdesk support (e.g., ticketing and email support with
          scheduled support hours), as well as basic training and “how-to” materials.
          105. Interoperability with external information systems would follow a tiered approach.
          Initial operationalization would rely on link mode, with selective expansion over time
          to introduce metadata harvesting or application programming interface-based
          integrations for a limited number of priority use cases, once appropriate oversight and
          management arrangements and security arrangements are in place.
          106. Potential advantages of this option include:
               (a)   Faster and simpler path to initial operational readiness;
               (b)   Lower initial build complexity, with fewer technical dependencies;
               (c)   Clear accountability through a single primary operator; and
               (d)   Avoidance of duplicating large scientific datasets by building on existing
          system.
          107. Potential trade-offs and risks include:
               (a) Higher early operational workload for the secretariat (e.g., moderation,
          publication quality assurance, and helpdesk demand during peak periods);
               (b)   Some usability improvements being deferred to later phases;
               (c) The possibility that introducing nodes or deeper integrations later may
          require redesign of certain workflows rather than simple add-ons; and
               (d) Proximity-based alerts, if provided by the Mechanism, initially operating at
          a minimum viable level, with geospatial accuracy and performance requiring
          enhancement as usage grows.
          108. Indicative resource requirements, expressed in full-time equivalent (FTE)
          workload estimates, for phases 1 through 4 (see Part (c) of the Study) are as follows:


                                                                                                      30/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


               (a) Build and configuration (one-off): approximately 24 to 40 FTE-months (2 to
          3.3 FTE-years);
                (b) Peak build and go-live period: approximately 4 to 7 FTE (concurrent
          staffing);
              (c) Ongoing operations (annual, secretariat-resourced): approximately 2.5 to 4.0
          FTE per year; and
                (d) Distributed effort outside the secretariat (e.g., nominating users, reviewing
          and approving submissions, basic coordination across agencies, coordination with the
          secretariat, etc.): approximately 0.05 to 0.15 FTE per national focal point, plus delegated
          user time.
          109. Decisions of the Conference of the Parties that would affect cost and scope under
          this option include minimum metadata and attachment requirements, multilingual policy,
          validation rules, confidentiality criteria, proximity-based alert policy, and the external
          databases and information systems to be integrated pursuant to the tiered approach.
          Option B: Central system with regional and subregional nodes 7
          110. Under this option, the Mechanism would be operationalized through a secretariat -
          managed central system that remains the authoritative source for records generated
          pursuant to the Agreement, complemented by regional or subregional nodes that provide
          localized support, assisted workflows and improved connectivity.
          111. This option distributes complexity across the central system and nodes, subject to
          common standards and oversight. It requires greater coordination and resources up front,
          intended to reduce later bottlenecks and improve resilience as number of Parties and
          authorized users and the corresponding number of submissions and records grow.
          112. Upon initial operationalization, this option would deliver all baseline requirements
          described under Option A through the central system, with nodes that could provide:
              (a) Offline continuity through queued               synchronization    (i.e.,   preparing
          submissions offline and syncing when connected);
               (b) Local performance improvements, such as caching or mirroring public
          content closer to users;
                (c) Assisted validation workflows to reduce errors before records are submitted
          to the central system; and
               (d) Localized user support, including language and time-zone coverage, and
          regionally or subregionally appropriate support.
          113. Under this option, the central system would remain the authoritative location for
          the publication of official records, the management of global alerts, and the completion
          of core Agreement-related workflows, including the generation of the “BBNJ”
          standardized batch identifiers.
          114. Potential advantages of this option include:
               (a) Stronger practical support for developing States, in particular least developed
          countries and small island developing States, which may face connectivity and
          bandwidth constraints;
                (b) Improved quality and timeliness of submissions (e.g., fewer errors and more
          effective engagement) through localized support and assisted workflows;



          7Examples of such oversight and management arrangements include the Ocean Biodiversity
          Information System (OBIS) and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF).
                                                                                                          31/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


                (c) Greater flexibility to support functions relating to traditional knowledge
          closer to communities (i.e., sensitive content can remain within trusted arrangements
          while metadata and access conditions are handled centrally); and
               (d) Better long-term resilience and scalability if the Mechanism needs to
          accommodate higher-than-expected volume of use.
          115. Potential trade-offs and risks include:
                (a)   Higher build and operating costs compared with Option A;
               (b) Increased oversight and management requirements to ensure consistent
          standards and accountability across nodes;
                (c)   Risk of uneven service quality if node capacity varies; and
               (d) Stronger coordination requirements for security and confidentiality controls
          across multiple operating environments.
          116. Indicative resource requirements (FTE-based) for phases 1 through 4 (see Part (c)
          of the Study) are as follows:
               (a) Build and configure (one-off): approximately 42 to 80 FTE-months (3.5 to
          6.7 FTE-years);
                (b)   Peak build and go-live period: approximately 6 to 10 FTE;
                (c) Ongoing operations (annual, secretariat-resourced core): approximately 4.5
          to 7.5 FTE per year; and
               (d) Distributed effort outside the secretariat: approximately 1 to 3 FTE per year
          per node (where deployed), plus national focal point effort (as under Option A).
          117. Decisions of the Conference of the Parties that would affect cost and scope under
          this option include all decisions identified under Option A, as well as whether nodes are
          endorsed or optional, minimum standards applicable to nodes, who operates nodes, the
          extent to which restricted workflows may be handled by nodes locally (and under what
          controls), and expected support coverage and service levels.
          Option C: Retrofit an existing clearing-house mechanism or an information system 8
          118. Under this option, the Mechanism would be operationalized by retrofitting an
          existing clearing-house platform to provide core capabilities (e.g., identity management,
          workflows, publication and versioning), supplemented by specific modules to perform
          functions required under the Agreement.
          119. In this model, complexity is divided between the retrofitted platform, with its
          capabilities and constraints, and the management by the secretariat of its dependencies
          on that platform Up-front efficiencies may arise if the platform aligns well with the
          requirements, while long-term costs and risks may arise from customization, upgrades
          and change-management requirements.
          120. Upon initial operationalization, this option could deliver baseline capabilities more
          rapidly if the retrofitted platform already provides robust core functionalities, such as:
                (a)   User registration and role-based access;
                (b)   Submission workflows and templating;


          8An example of a retrofit approach is the Access and Benefit-Sharing Clearing-House (ABSCH)
          under the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of
          Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). The
          ABSCH was initially developed by building on the core functionalities of the Biosafety Clearing-
          House (BCH) under the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the CBD, which had been built earlier.
                                                                                                             32/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


               (c)   Publication patterns and version history; and
               (d)   Basic search and record pages.
          121. Additional modules specific to the requirements under the BBNJ Agreement would
          still need to be developed or adapted to support:
               (a)   The generation and resolution of “BBNJ” standardized batch identifiers;
                (b) Agreement-specific alerts, including proximity-based alerts if such a feature
          is provided;
               (c) Workflows relating to the establishment of area-based management tools,
          including marine protected areas;
              (d) Workflows relating to environmental impact assessments, including bundled
          document downloads;
               (e) Confidentiality controls and safeguards for traditional knowledge of
          Indigenous Peoples and local communities, including metadata-only publication and
          controlled access requests; and
                (f) Functionalities supporting the needs and priorities assessment of developing
          States Parties in terms of capacity-building and the transfer of marine technology, and
          the matching of capacity-building needs with the support available and with providers
          for the transfer of marine technology.
          122. Potential advantages of this option include:
               (a) Reduced build time by avoiding the development of standard platform
          capabilities from scratch;
               (b) Ability to leverage existing maturity in security, identity management and
          workflow tooling; and
               (c) Potential simplification of training where the platform is already familiar to
          some users.
          123. Potential trade-offs and risks include:
               (a) Cost savings are not guaranteed, as missing capabilities may require
          substantial customization;
                (b) Long-term sustainability depends on the roadmap and upgrade cycles of the
          retrofitted platform;
               (c) Risk of lock-in or reduced flexibility if the Mechanism becomes tightly
          coupled to the retrofitted platform; and
              (d) Ongoing operational workload remains, including helpdesk support and
          moderation.
          124. Indicative resources requirements (FTE-based) for phases 1 through 4 (see Part (c)
          of the Study) is not available for this option.
          125. Decisions of the Conference of the Parties that would affect the cost and scope
          under this option include all decisions identified under Option A, as well as selection of
          the platform to be retrofitted, the long-term operating model, requirements for geospatial
          and offline functionalities, the strictness of confidentiality and safeguards for traditional
          knowledge, and expectations regarding control and flexibility versus speed of deployment.




                                                                                                          33/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


  Table 5.
  Indicative comparison of Options A to C
        Comparable decision point            Option A (Central system)    Option B (Central system + nodes)         Option C (Retrofit platform)
    Meeting baseline requirements      Yes                               Yes                                  Yes (subject to the fitness of
    upon initial operationalization                                                                           the selected platform)
    Primary workload                   Secretariat                       Secretariat and nodes                Secretariat and/or existing
                                                                                                              clearing-house mechanism or
                                                                                                              information system
    Initial       operationalization   Lower                             Higher                               Variable
    complexity (relative)
    Speed to initial operational       Faster                            Slower                               Variable
    readiness (relative)
    Indicative build effort (FTE,      ~2 to 4                           ~4 to 7                              N/A
    one-year build)
    Indicative annual operational      ~2.5 to 4.0                       ~4.5 to 7.5                          N/A
    effort (FTE per year, the
    secretariat core)
    Additional effort outside the      national focal points (small      Nodes (1 to 3 FTE per node           N/A
    secretariat (structural)           fraction of FTE)                  per year), plus national focal
                                                                         points (same as Option A)
    Oversight and management           Lower                             Higher (standards and                Medium–High (platform
    burden (relative)                                                    assurance across nodes)              oversight and change-
                                                                                                              management)
    Primary long-term risk             Central bottlenecks and           Coordination burden and              Customization, upgrade
                                       potential later redesign if       uneven node capacity                 dependency, or platform lock-
                                       distribution is introduced                                             in risk
    Indicative suitability             Prioritizing rapid initial        Prioritizing early investment        Prioritizing reuse of an
                                       deployment and simplicity         in distributed support and           existing platform, subject to
                                                                         resilience                           sustained suitability

               126. A table of elements that could be considered for hybrid configurations and an
               illustrative example of a hybrid configuration are presented in Appendix C below.

        V.     Artificial intelligence-assisted interaction layer (natural language
               and agentic interaction) as a top-layer to the selected option
               127. An optional, additive capability in the form of an artificial intelligence (AI)-
               assisted interaction layer could be introduced, irrespective of which option is selected
               for the operationalization of the Mechanism. This layer would sit above the selected
               design of the Mechanism and is intended to reduce user burden and improve discove ry
               across the content of the Mechanism and approved external information sources, without
               changing the underlying allocation of authority or the core workflows.
               128. This layer could be implemented through controlled connectors (i.e., governed
               interfaces to the search and indexing functions of the Mechanism and to any approved
               external information sources). Such connectors could enable:
                     (a) Natural-language search and guided navigation, including multilingual query
               handling (e.g., allowing users to search in one language and retrieve relevant results
               stored in another), with clear references to the underlying records; and
                    (b) Authorized automated assistance (i.e., software tools operating solely on pre -
               defined instructions) to execute approved queries against the records of the Mechanism
               and against indexes or federated application programming interfaces, subject to access
               controls, audit logging and limits on request frequency.
               129. The primary purpose of this layer would be to support discovery and navigation
               across large volumes of the content within the Mechanism and linked information
               sources, and to reduce manual effort for well-defined, repetitive information retrieval
               tasks, without altering decision-making authority. The layer would function as an
               overlay to the selected interoperability modes (link, metadata harvesting, or application

                                                                                                                                                   34/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


           programming interface) and would only access information available under the selected
           mode. It would not bypass oversight and management arrangements or permissions.
           Outputs generated through this layer should be treated as user-support tools, rather than
           official or legally authoritative outputs under the Agreement. Any AI-enabled function
           would need to be auditable, respect confidentiality safeguards and safeguards for
           traditional knowledge, and follow a clear policy on where human verification is required,
           particularly for technical, legal or time-sensitive content where precision is essential.
           130. Indicative additional resource requirements (high-level) for implementing a basic,
           read-only AI assistant are as follows:
               (a) Build and configuration (one-off): approximately 6 to 12 full-time equivalent
           (FTE)-months (0.5 to 1.0 FTE-years); and
                 (b) Ongoing operations: approximately 0.5 to 1.5 FTE per year for monitoring,
           safeguards, prompt and tool governance and support, in addition to variable non-labor
           costs such as compute and inference, secure hosting, indexing and search infrastructure,
           and multilingual support, which would scale mainly with usage and scope.

     VI.   Modalities for the operationalization of the Mechanism that may
           need to be determined by the Conference of the Parties at its first
           meeting
           131. The following parameters materially affect the architecture, functioning and cost
           of the Mechanism, and may therefore need to be determined by the Conference of the
           Parties at its first meeting, or addressed through interim guidance where feasible:
                 (a) Minimum required metadata fields for each type of record, including defined
           requirements for notifications on activities with respect to marine genetic resources and
           digital sequence information, mandatory attachments, and support for assisted or offline
           submission formats (e.g., Excel or Word formats);
                 (b) Definition and governance of confidentiality classifications (public,
           restricted and confidential), including criteria for classification and handling;
                (c) User role taxonomy, verification rules and delegation mechanisms, including
           whether, and under what conditions, users from non‑Parties may submit information;
                 (d) Safeguards for traditional knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and local
           communities, including minimum consent and provenance requirements, access request
           pathways, and whether traditional knowledge content may be hosted centrally or
           referenced through metadata with controlled access pointers;
                 (e) Policy on proximity-based alerts, if such a feature is provided, including
           applicable geographic triggers, permissible areas of interest and minimum geospatial
           data requirements;
                 (f) Interoperability priorities, including which external systems should be
           prioritized and which interoperability modes are authorized;
                (g) Policy on nodes, if applicable, including whether nodes are endorsed, the
           applicable oversight and management model, and minimum security and operational
           standards for nodes;
                (h) Language and translation policy, including which elements must be
           multilingual, expected service levels and the allocation of responsibilities; and
                (i) Minimum cybersecurity baseline and audit requirements, including incident
           response expectations and data retention policies.



                                                                                                       35/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


            Part (c)
            Draft roadmap for the phased operationalization of the Mechanism

       I.   Introduction
            132. This part of the Study presents a draft roadmap for the phased operationalization
            of the Mechanism, reflecting a commonly used sequence for developing and launching
            complex information systems, including Phase 1 (Discovery), Phase 2 (Alpha), Phase 3
            (Beta), and Phase 4 (Launch and maintenance). While different options or hybrid
            configurations may affect the emphasis, complexity or resource requirements within
            individual phases, the overall sequence is not altered.
            133. The indicative resource requirements for Phases 1 through 4 cover the estimated
            costs for IT delivery experts, as well as for supporting infrastructure and external services,
            as discussed in Section VII of Part (c) below. Other resource requirements that may be
            required across all the options are addressed in paragraph 1, 2, and 6 of Appendix D.

      II.   Overall approach
            134. The operationalization of the Mechanism can be approached as the launch of an
            ongoing service, rather than as a one-time technical build. In practical terms, this means
            that:
                 (a) Each phase delivers clearly identifiable outputs that can be reviewed and
            agreed (for example, defined workflows, tested system functions or operational
            procedures);
                  (b) Each phase includes structured opportunities for feedback from intended
            users and operators; and
                  (c) Progression from one phase to the next is subject to a decision point
            confirming that minimum conditions are met before additional scope or complexity is
            introduced.
            135. The phased approach reflects two core assumptions already set out in the Study:
                 (a) The Mechanism will initially be operationalized as a minimum viable product
            and expanded over time; and
                  (b) Some elements (e.g., deeper interoperability arrangements, the use of nodes,
            or certain confidentiality and traditional knowledge-related modalities) may need to be
            introduced progressively.
            136. Each phase will generate a defined set of documents and operational evidence (e.g.,
            an agreed scope baseline, test scripts and results, security assessment outputs and readiness
            checklists). Progression to the subsequent phase should be based on explicit acceptance
            criteria confirmed by the secretariat and, where relevant, any oversight arrangements
            mandated by the Conference of the Parties. These criteria may take into account relevant
            considerations identified in Part (a) of the Study (e.g., lessons learned from existing
            clearing-house mechanisms) and tiered interoperability with existing databases,
            information systems and clearing-house mechanisms explored in Appendix A. These
            acceptance criteria define the minimum conditions required to proceed to the next phase.
            137. Figure 1 below illustrates the phased approach to the operationalization of the
            Mechanism.
  Figure 1.
  Illustration of the phased approach to the operationalization of the Mechanism



                                                                                                             36/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26




     III.   Phase 1 (Discovery)
            138. The purpose of Phase 1 (Discovery) is to clearly define what the Mechanism must
            be able to do at the point of the initial operationalization. Activities in this phase will
            ensure that the requested scope is feasible, coherent and aligned with any decisions of the
            Conference of the Parties and other relevant factors, such as the availability of resources.
            Building on the Study, Phase 1 includes the confirmation of users and workflows, among
            others, including validation from an IT systems perspective that the identified workflows
            and constraints can be appropriately addressed through system design.
            139. The key activities of Phase 1 are as follows:
                 (a) Confirming workflows: Confirm, step-by-step, how information will be
            submitted, reviewed, published, accessed and updated for each substantive element
            addressed by the Agreement, as well as for cross-cutting functions such as alerts,
            reporting and user support;
                  (b) Confirming practical constraints: Identify conditions that may affect the use
            of the Mechanism, such as low-connectivity environments, power outages and
            anticipated peaks in activity around deadlines or reporting cycles;
                 (c) Confirming any context-specific operating requirements: Depending on the
            arrangements for the functioning of the secretariat, including any institutional linkages
            with the United Nations, confirm any applicable institution-specific operating
            requirements, such as security and confidentiality requirements, that would need to be
            incorporated in the design;
                  (d) Confirming the functionalities for initial operationalization: Clearly
            distinguish functionalities that must be available at the time of initial operationalization
            from those that can be introduced later (e.g., data harvesting);
                 (e) Confirming policy-dependent parameters: Identify design choices that
            depend on decisions of the Conference of the Parties (e.g., confidentiality classifications,
            handling of traditional knowledge, any requirements for proximity-based alerts and
            expectations regarding nodes), and record such parameters explicitly as items requiring
            subsequent determination;


                                                                                                           37/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


                 (f) Confirming roles and responsibilities of users and administrators: Clarify the
           roles and responsibilities of users and administrators during normal operation, including,
           for example, which steps are automated, which require secretariat review, and where
           national focal points or other actors are involved;
                 (g) Confirming standards for interoperability: Confirm the minimum set of
           common data fields and naming rules (e.g., record type, dates, submitting Party,
           geographic tags and stable identifiers) required to support the sharing, linking and
           retrieval of information across systems;
                 (h) Initial resource framing: Map the agreed scope against the workstreams
           identified in the Study (e.g., oversight, management and coordination, technical
           delivery, security and hosting, user support, content management, and interoperability
           management) to confirm that the proposed scope can be delivered within the available
           lead time and resources.
           140. The outputs of Phase 1 include:
                (a) A clear definition of the scope for initial operationalization and for
           subsequent phases;
                (b)   Descriptions of end-to-end workflows for users and operators;
                (c)   A high-level description of information types, records and identifiers;
                (d)   A list of key risks and assumptions; and
                (e)   A plan for incorporating user feedback in subsequent phases.
           141. User feedback is gathered through targeted consultations, such as structured
           interviews or short walk-throughs of proposed workflows, involving representative
           users, which may include secretariat staff, national focal points, as well as users from
           least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing
           States, relevant instruments, frameworks and bodies, civil society, the scientific
           community, the private sector and Indigenous Peoples and local communities.
           142. Phase 1 is considered complete when the scope for initial operationalization is
           clearly defined and confirmed, end-to-end workflows are documented and validated with
           intended users, design choices depending on decisions of the Conference of the Parties
           are explicitly identified, roles and responsibilities of users and administrators are
           clarified, and the proposed scope is confirmed to be feasible in terms of resources,
           operating context, and lead time.
           143. Phase 1 concludes with approval of the scope for initial operationalization, clarity
           on issues requiring decisions of the Conference of the Parties, and confidence that the
           most complex requirements can be tested in Phase 2 (Alpha), including through a
           working test version of key system functions based on agreed approaches to security,
           confidentiality and auditability, together with draft operating procedures for core tasks
           and updated resource estimates reflecting lessons learned.

     IV.   Phase 2 (Alpha)
           144. The purpose of Phase 2 (Alpha) is to test whether the agreed design functions in
           practice, before committing to a full operational build. The focus of this phase is on
           validating functionality and safeguards.
           145. The key activities of Phase 2 are as follows:
                (a) Testing core workflows: Implement and test the main sequences of actions
           required under the Agreement, such as submission of notifications, basic checks,
           publication, search and retrieval, and the generation of alerts;


                                                                                                        38/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


                 (b) Testing higher-risk elements at an early stage: Test the generation and
           resolution of the “BBNJ” standardized batch identifiers; handling of confidential or
           proprietary information; treatment of traditional knowledge using metadata-only or
           controlled-access approaches; implementation of minimum proximity-based alerts,
           where applicable; and operation under low-bandwidth conditions;
                (c) Confirming consistent presentation and terminology: Ensure that submission
           templates, record pages and user guidance are internally consistent and aligned with the
           terminology of the Agreement; and
                (d) Preparing for operation: Begin drafting basic operating procedures for
           moderation, account management and user support at a level sufficient to assess
           operational feasibility.
           146. The outputs of Phase 2 include:
                (a)   A working test version of key system functions;
                (b)   An agreed approach to security, confidentiality and auditability;
                (c)   Draft operating procedures for core tasks; and
                (d)   Updated resource estimates reflecting lessons learned.
           147. User feedback is gathered by inviting users to carry out realistic tasks (e.g.,
           submitting a notification, correcting errors, locating published information or subscribing
           to alerts) and to provide structured feedback, which is used to refine the design.
           148. Phase 2 is considered complete when core operational workflows function end-to-
           end in a test environment, higher-risk elements are demonstrated in practice, security
           and audit approaches are workable, and remaining risks are understood and manageable.
           149. Phase 2 concludes once the secretariat confirms that the acceptance criteria above
           have been met.

      V.   Phase 3 (Beta)
           150. The purpose of Phase 3 (Beta) is to prepare the Mechanism for real-world use by
           a limited group of users, with an emphasis on operational readiness rather than design
           validation.
           151. The key activities of Phase 3 are as follows:
                (a) Ensuring reliability and security: Test system performance, backups, logging,
           access controls and security measures at a level appropriate for operational use ;
                 (b) Confirming accessibility and multilingual support: Verify that the system can
           be used in low-connectivity environments, that navigation and core workflows function
           as intended, and that document handling performs reliably at expected volumes;
                (c) Preparing support arrangements: Finalize user guidance, training materials,
           and helpdesk processes, and confirm staffing and support assumptions; and
                (d) Running controlled pilots: Operate the Mechanism with representative users
           to confirm that it performs as expected in practice.
           152. The outputs of Phase 3 include:
                (a)   A near-final operational version of the Mechanism;
                (b)   Training and support materials;
                (c)   A go-live readiness assessment identifying any remaining issues; and
                (d)   A consolidated record of user feedback and resulting adjustments.

                                                                                                         39/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


           153. Phase 3 is considered complete when the Mechanism operates in a near-final
           configuration, performs reliably under expected operating conditions, accessibility and
           multilingual support function as intended, user guidance and support arrangements are
           in place, and pilot use confirms readiness for initial launch with only minor documented
           issues remaining.
           154. Phase 3 concludes once the Mechanism is secure, usable, supportable and fit for
           initial launch.

     VI.   Phase 4 (Launch and maintenance)
           155. Phase 4 (launch and maintenance) covers the formal launch of the Mechanism and
           its transition into sustained, routine operation. The emphasis in this phase is on
           maintaining a reliable and secure system, monitoring real-world use, and introducing
           continuous improvements and any enhancements authorized by the Conference of the
           Parties beyond the initial minimum viable product. This phase treats the Mechanism as
           an evolving operational capability rather than a completed build.
           156. The key activities of Phase 4 are as follows:
                (a) Launching and stabilizing operations: Bring the Mechanism into live use,
           with enhanced support during the initial period to resolve early issues, clarify
           workflows, and stabilize performance;
                (b) Operating and maintaining the Mechanism: Provide ongoing hosting,
           security, monitoring, backups, incident response, and routine maintenance to ensure
           continuity, integrity and availability over time;
                 (c) Maintaining safeguards and operational controls: Operate confidentiality,
           audit, versioning, and publication controls in steady state, including agreed approaches
           for handling sensitive information and traditional knowledge;
                 (d) Providing ongoing user support: Deliver sustained helpdesk and support, and
           use recurring issues to identify systemic usability or workflow improvements; and
                 (e) Monitor usage, performance and data quality: Track submissions, alerts,
           access patterns, response times, error rates and data completeness to understand how the
           Mechanism functions in practice and to identify emerging friction, risks or opportunities
           for improvements.
           157. The outputs of Phase 4 include:
                (a)   A live, operational Mechanism in routine use;
                (b)   Ongoing user support arrangements and updated user guidance;
                (c) Operational and usage information (e.g., submissions, alerts and performance
           indicators);
                (d)   Incremental system enhancements and updated documentation; and
                (e) A forward-looking improvement plan aligned with decisions of the
           Conference of the Parties.
           158. User feedback is collected continuously through helpdesk interactions, targeted
           user sessions and operational reporting, and is used to inform the prioritization of
           maintenance and improvement activities.
           159. Phase 4 is considered to have commenced when the secretariat confirms that the
           Mechanism is live and accessible for intended users, operational responsibilities and
           support arrangements are in place, monitoring of usage and performance is active,
           safeguards operate in steady state, and a defined process exists for prioritizing and
           delivering ongoing improvements in line with decisions of the Conference of the Parties.

                                                                                                       40/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


    VII.   Indicative cost estimates and lead time
           160. Lead time refers to the elapsed time needed from a decision to proceed to the point
           of initial operationalization of the Mechanism. Lead time is highly sensitive to resourcing
           levels, delivery arrangements and implementation choices. The ranges set out below
           should therefore be read as order-of-magnitude indications rather than firm schedules.
           161. The indicative cost estimates below reflect the estimated total cost to reach initial
           operationalization under each option. They are derived using a bottom -up, role-based
           approach. For each option, the delivery roles required to achieve initial operationalization
           were identified, together with the period for which those roles would be needed. Estimated
           levels of effort for each role (with some roles full-time and others time-limited or
           fractional) were multiplied by blended rates typical of international public -sector digital
           delivery. Non-staff costs are included to reflect infrastructure and tooling over the
           expected delivery period. Actual costs may vary depending on delivery arrangements,
           staffing choices, sequencing of work, and pricing of supporting services such as cloud
           hosting, software licenses and security testing. Other factors, such as the number of
           interface languages or refinements to alert features, may also affect costs at the margins.
           162. The indicative lead time and cost estimates for Option A are as follows:
                (a)   Indicative lead time: Approximately 9 to 12 months from the start of Phase 1.
                (b)   Indicative cost estimates: Approximately USD 2 to 4 million.
                (i) This range reflects the cost of a compact, multi-disciplinary delivery team
                responsible for end-to-end delivery, including product management, solution
                architecture, front-end and back-end development, user experience and
                accessibility design, quality assurance and testing, development operations and
                security engineering, and technical documentation and user guidance. Roles may
                be combined or provided on a part-time basis depending on the delivery
                arrangements and the final scope. The potential benefits and trade-offs associated
                with Option A, as discussed in Part (c) of the Study, may be considered.
                (ii) The cost of IT delivery experts is expected to account for approximately
                USD1.4 to 3.0 million of the total.
                (iii) Supporting infrastructure and external services are expected to account for
                approximately USD 0.6 to 1.0 million, covering cloud hosting for development,
                testing and production; managed storage and databases; monitoring and logging;
                identity and access management; code repositories and build pipelines; and time -
                limited security assurance activities such as vulnerability scanning and penetration
                testing. A basic level of multilingual interface support is assumed.
           163. The indicative lead time and cost estimates for Option B are as follows:
                (a) Indicative lead time: Approximately 15 to 24 months from the start of Phase
           1, depending in particular on how nodes are defined, introduced and resourced. Under
           Option B, the Mechanism is delivered as a central system managed by the secretariat,
           complemented by regional or subregional nodes that provide localized support, assisted
           workflows, or connectivity enhancements under agreed standards.
                (b)   Indicative cost estimates: Approximately USD 3 to 6 million.
                (i) As discussed in Part (c) of this Study, the higher cost range relative to Option
                A reflects the additional complexity associated with designing, coordinating and
                supporting a distributed delivery model. In addition to the central system described
                under Option A, this option requires additional effort for node-related design,
                integration, security assurance, coordination mechanisms, and supporting tooling
                to ensure that the central hub remains the single authoritative record.


                                                                                                          41/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


                (ii) The cost of IT delivery experts under this option are expected to account for
                approximately USD 2.2 to 4.5 million of the total, reflecting higher overall staffing
                levels and longer involvement of architecture, security and interoperability roles.
                (iii) Supporting infrastructure and external services are expected to account for
                approximately USD 0.8 to 1.5 million, reflecting additional environments,
                integration tooling, security controls across multiple operating contexts, and higher
                coordination overhead.
           164. For Option C, indicative lead time and cost estimates depend primarily on which
           existing platform is identified for retrofitting and its constraints, and can vary
           significantly depending on several factors, in particular the degree of customization
           required, including in relation to the level of security required, the types of user
           information to be collected, whether statistical or geospatial datasets are to be integrated
           (and to what extent visualization is required), the volume of confidential information,
           and the most suitable data and application architecture. Consultations with existing
           platforms undertaken for the purpose of the Study suggest that, for some platforms, lead
           time of up to three years and indicative cost estimates of approximately USD 5 to 6.3
           million may be required. These indicative cost estimates are additional to any staffing
           resources that would be required for the secretariat for the management of the
           Mechanism
           165. Illustrative hybrid configurations can vary widely, as they combine elements of
           Options A, B and C on a function-by-function basis. As a result, both the time required
           to reach initial operationalization and the total cost depend on the specific configuration
           selected, including whether node-supported workflows or retrofitted platform
           components are included. The indicative lead time and cost estimates are based on the
           illustrative hybrid example described in Appendix C of the Study, which applies node -
           supported approaches selectively for participation and consultation-intensive functions
           while retaining a central system for others.
                (a)   Indicative lead time: Approximately 12 to 18 months from the start of Phase 1.
                 (b) Indicative cost estimates: Approximately USD 2.5 to 5.5 million, derived
           using the same bottom-up, role-based costing approach applied to Options A and B.
           These figures apply only to this illustrative example; other hybrid configurations would
           entail different lead time and cost estimates.

   VIII.   Aspects following initial operationalization
           166. Once the four phases have been completed, the Mechanism should be treated as an
           ongoing service. Any substantial new functionality or expansion beyond the initial scope
           of the initial operationalization should be addressed through a separate, subsequent
           project (e.g., a new version), with its own discovery, design and implementation process,
           as appropriate. The indicative timelines and resource estimates in this roadmap do not
           include such subsequent development, as such work would constitute a distinct effort
           requiring separate decisions and resourcing.

           Part (d)
           Draft workplan for the initial phase for the operationalization of the
           Mechanism

      I.   Introduction
           167. Part (d) of the Study presents a draft workplan for the initial phase for the
           operationalization of the Mechanism. The objective of this part is to identify specific
           activities, outputs and resources requirements.

                                                                                                          42/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


      II.   Pre-Phase 1
            168. Prior to the beginning of Phase 1 (Discovery), the following activities would need
            to be undertaken:
                 (a) Confirmation of option and key parameters: Choice of the overall option for
            the Mechanism (Options A, B or C, 9 or a hybrid configuration 10);
                 (b) Clarification of the parameters identified in paragraph 131 of Part (b) of the
            Study; and
                 (c) Acquisition of required capacity and allocation of required resources,
            including:
                  (i) Determination of the delivery arrangements for Phase 1, including whether
                  the work will be undertaken through the creation of in-house capacity, engagement
                  of consultants or individual contractors, using a vendor, or a combination thereof;
                  (ii) Identification and securing of the resources required, including through
                  budgetary processes and resource mobilization, as appropriate; and
                  (iii) Hiring, contracting or procurement processes, as appropriate, to enable the
                  selected delivery arrangements.

     III.   Phase 1 (Discovery) activities and outputs
            169. The key activities of Phase 1 are as discussed in paragraph 139 of this Study. The
            key outputs are discussed in paragraph 140 of this Study.

     IV.    Indicative lead time and cost estimates for Phase 1
            170. The indicative lead time range and cost estimates discussed below reflect the time
            and costs for discovery, design and scoping work to be undertaken by technical experts
            during Phase 1, but do not include time and costs that may be required for decision-
            making by the Conference of the Parties, the provision of guidance through any
            oversight arrangement, or engagement with and among Parties and relevant
            stakeholders. In addition, the time and costs that may be required for activities leading
            up to Phase 1are also not included.
      A.    Indicative lead time range for Options A, B, and C
            171. For Option A and Option B, Phase 1 serves the same purpose: to translate the
            selected option into an implementable and testable scope for initial operationalization.
            Phase 1 focuses on defining what must exist at launch, confirming workflows and
            responsibilities, identifying dependencies on decisions of the Conference of the Parties,
            and checking that the proposed scope can realistically be delivered within the assumed
            resourcing and lead time. The activities and outputs of Phase 1 are substantively the
            same across both options; what differs is the complexity and effort required. These
            indicative differences should be interpreted alongside risk reduction and feasibility
            benefits identified through Phase 1 assessments, which may reduce rework in later
            phases.
            172. Under Option A, Phase 1 is more straightforward because all functions are handled
            centrally. There are no nodes to define, no inter-entity coordination rules to establish,
            and fewer complexities to resolve. As a result, the indicative estimated lead time for
            Phase 1 for Option A is approximately four to six weeks, corresponding to roughly 60 to



            9 Option C would require a decision on the existing platform that would be retrofitted and on the
            oversight and management arrangements (a central system only or a central system plus nodes).
            10 A hybrid configuration would require a decision on the combination of the functional elements.

                                                                                                                43/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


           100 working days across a compact, multi-disciplinary core team using the same
           assumptions applied elsewhere in this roadmap.
           173. Under Option B, Phase 1 follows the same steps but requires additional definition
           work up front. Such additional work includes clarifying what nodes do and do not do,
           how information flows between nodes and the central system, and how security,
           confidentiality, and safeguards for traditional knowledge are applied consistently across
           the network. Because of the consequent added coordination and design effort, the
           indicative estimated lead time of Phase 1 for Option B is approximately six to eight
           weeks, corresponding to roughly 90 to 150 working days across the core team under the
           same assumptions.
           174. These indicative timelines are illustrative only. Actual duration and effort will
           depend on the scope developed in Phase 1, and delivery arrangements. The estimates are
           intended to provide a consistent basis for comparison across options.
           175. For Option C, indicative estimated lead time for Phase 1 is not available given the
           uncertainties discussed in paragraph 164 of Part (c) of the Study.
      B.   Indicative lead time for the illustrative example of a hybrid
           configuration (see Appendix C)
           176. The illustrative example of a hybrid configuration, presented in Appendix C of the
           Study, demonstrates how a combination of elements from Options A, B and C may be
           chosen for the operationalization of the Mechanism, with more detailed discussions in
           connection with its functions. The IT delivery experts would then translate the
           information to determine the IT architecture and design required to build the Mechanism.
           177. The following paragraphs use the illustrative hybrid example provided in Appendix
           C to demonstrate how the Phase 1 steps discussed above may be applied in practice,
           including the indicative roles involved, the level of effort required, the activities
           undertaken, and the outputs produced.
           178. For the illustrative hybrid example, Phase 1 is assumed to take approximately six
           weeks. During that time, functions will be selected from the hybrid configuration and
           translated into an implementable and testable scope for initial operationalization. Phase
           1 is intended to produce a validated understanding of what must be delivered at
           operationalization, what may be deferred, which depends on decisions of the Conference
           of the Parties, and what is feasible within the assumed resourcing and lead time. Thi s,
           in turn, enables Phase 2 (Alpha) to prioritize building key components and test them at
           an early stage.
           179. For the illustrative hybrid example, the following indicative lead time may be
           required:
                 (a) Product manager (0.8 to 1.0 full-time equivalent (FTE), approximately 24 to
           30 working days): Overall responsibility for Phase 1 delivery, scope control,
           prioritization, timelines, and coordination across technical workstreams; primary liaison
           with the secretariat and stakeholders, as appropriate.
                 (b) Technical lead and solution architect (0.5 to 0.8 FTE, approximately 15 to 24
           working days): Defines system security rules for the hybrid model, validates feasibility
           of reuse and node-supported participation, and record preservation.
                 (c) User experience and service designer (0.3 to 0.5 FTE, approximately 9 to 15
           working days): Designs user journeys, submission flows, alerts, and accessibility
           features for central workflows, node-supported participation, and low-connectivity use.
                (d) Software engineers (front-end and back-end) (0.4 to 0.8 FTE combined,
           approximately 12 to 24 working days): Supports Phase 1 through technical consultations


                                                                                                       44/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


           and feasibility checks (e.g., retrofit platform fit for user management and search, alert
           distribution patterns, basic interoperability assumptions).
                (e) Data and systems analyst (0.3 to 0.5 FTE, approximately 9 to 15 working
           days): Defines record types, database setup, data pipelines, and validation logic needed .
                (f) Documentation and requirements specialist (0.2 to 0.3 FTE, approximately 6
           to 9 working days): Translates requirements into engineering specifications, workflow
           descriptions, risks and assumptions, and decision logs.
                 (g) Development operations and cloud operations specialist (0.1 to 0.2 FTE,
           fractional, approximately 3 to 6 working days): Advises on hosting, environments, and
           operational constraints
                (h) Security specialist (0.1 to 0.2 FTE fractional and on-demand, approximately
           3 to 6 working days): Reviews confidentiality handling, safeguards for traditional
           knowledge, access control and auditability.
      C.   Indicative cost estimates for Phase 1
           180. The indicative cost estimates outlined below are based on the assumption that,
           while Phase 1 may not be resource-intensive in terms of the working days or headcount
           for IT delivery experts, common practice typically requires the front-loading of senior
           technical expertise and coordination effort at the outset of Phase 1 in order to establish
           scope, reduce delivery risk and mobilize the work. It is further noted that the cost of
           Phase 1 may be at the higher end of the indicative range where the initial scope of the
           IT delivery work is not sufficiently defined. For example, where only a broad guidance,
           such as reference to Option B, is provided without specification of detailed
           functionalities, additional resources may be required during Phase 1 to determine
           detailed functionalities. On this basis and for the purpose of the Study, the indicative
           costs for Phase 1 are assumed to represent approximately one quarter of the total
           indicative cost estimates for the initial operationalization of the Mechanism (see Part (c)
           of the Study), noting that Phase 1 is one of four phases.
           181. Accordingly, the indicative cost ranges for Phase 1 are as follows, derived from
           the total indicative cost estimates outlined in Part (c) of the Study:
                (a)   For Option A: approximately USD 0.5 to 1 million;
                (b)   For Option B: approximately USD 0.75 to 1.5 million; and
                 (c) For the illustrative example of a hybrid configuration: approximately USD
           0.6 to 1.25 million.
           182. For Option C, an indicative cost estimate for Phase 1 is not available due to the
           uncertainties discussed in Part (c), paragraph 164, of the Study.
           183. In addition to the indicative cost estimates outlined above, which cover the
           estimated costs for IT delivery experts, as well as for supporting infrastructure and
           external services, there may be additional costs, as outlined in Appendix D of the Study.
                                                    ***




                                                                                                         45/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


Appendix A
          Indicative and non-exhaustive external source integration
          matrix
          [Intentionally left blank. See the attached spreadsheet]




                                                                      46/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


Appendix B
          Cost assessment approach

          1.    The resource requirements for the operationalization of the Mechanism will depend
          on various factors, which may include decisions by the Conference of the Parties on
          scope, workflows, oversight and management arrangements, procurement choices, and
          final service-level decisions. In the absence of clarity on these factors, estimated
          resource requirements are primarily expressed as estimated staffing requirements rather
          than fixed monetary figures. In other words, the estimated costs answer the question
          “what roles, how many full-time equivalent staff, performing which functions, and for
          what duration” before translating resource requirements into budget lines under different
          contracting and staffing models.
          2.    The cost profile of each option is expressed as:
               (a) Estimated headcount (Full‑Time Equivalent, or FTE) required to build and to
          operate the Mechanism;
                (b)   Indicative role mix and workstreams (i.e., team composition);
               (c) Key non‑labor cost drivers (e.g., hosting, cybersecurity testing, translation
          approach, specialist tooling); and
                (d) Cost incidence, indicating the distribution of costs among the secretariat,
          Parties and external partners, recognizing that some options may involve national,
          regional or subregional actors, as is the case for some platforms discussed in Part (a) of
          the Study.
          What is a “headcount” (FTE)?
          3.    For the purpose of the Study:
               (a) 1.0 FTE corresponds to one person working full‑time for one year on
          Mechanism-related functions (e.g., staff member, volunteer, consultant, or equivalent
          vendor capacity).
                (b) Headcount estimates are presented as ranges to reflect uncertainties related
          to the modalities for the operation of the Mechanism.
               (c) Functional roles may be combined in various ways, such as product
          management combined with policy liaison, Development-Security-Operations
          (DevSecOps) 11 combined with platform engineer, or dedicated security officer combined
          with dedicated training lead.
          Two complementary headcount approaches
          4.   Each option presents resource requirements using two complementary approaches,
          applied consistently across options:
                (a) Secretariat‑resourced FTE (central delivery capacity). Effort required within
          the secretariat, or directly contracted by it, to build and operate the Mechanism. This
          includes service management, engineering, DevSecOps and cybersecurity, information
          management, user support, and interoperability governance.
               (b) Distributed “ecosystem” FTE (incurred outside the secretariat). Effort borne
          by Parties, and, where applicable, by regional or subregional entities and other external
          partners to enable the Mechanism to function in practice. This may include, for example,

          11
            Development-Security-Operations (DevSecOps) refers to the combined functions of software
          development, system operations, and ongoing security tasks such as hosting, monitoring, patching,
          backups, vulnerability management, and incident response.
                                                                                                              47/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          focal point validation and approvals; preparation and quality assurance of submissions;
          inter-agency coordination; partner onboarding for interoperability; and localized user
          support in more distributed models.
          5.    These approaches do not presume a single funding model. They are intended to
          make explicit the workload distribution, including where capacity may be provided in -
          kind, supported through external assistance, or financed pursuant to decisions of the
          Conference of the Parties (e.g. through assessed contributions), even where functions
          are carried out by entities outside of the secretariat.
          How headcount is estimated for each option
          6.   Each option is assessed across two time horizons:
               (a) Build and configure (one‑off): Expressed as average FTE over the delivery
          period (e.g., an initial operationalization delivery window), plus any short -term surge
          needs (e.g., penetration testing, accessibility conformance reviews, and migration or
          import tasks); and
               (b) Operations (recurring): Expressed as annual steady‑state FTE required to
          operate, support, secure and incrementally improve the Mechanism after initial
          operationalization.
          7.   To ensure comparability across options, staffing estimates are grouped into
          consistent workstreams, which also help identify where functions may realistically be
          combined:
                (a) Product and governance (e.g., product owner and service manager, policy
          liaison, release planning, reporting to the Conference of the Parties and subsidiary
          bodies);
                (b) Engineering (e.g., solution architecture, application development, testing and
          quality assurance and documentation);
               (c) DevSecOps and cybersecurity (e.g., hosting, monitoring, patching, backups,
          vulnerability management and incident response);
                (d) User support and adoption (e.g., helpdesk; onboarding; training; moderation
          and triage; facilitation support for workflows such as environmental impact assessment
          consultations and needs and priorities assessments in terms of capacity-building and the
          transfer of marine technology);
              (e) Content and information management (e.g., record quality checks, metadata
          management, redaction workflow support and publication quality assurance); and
               (f) Interoperability and standards lifecycle (e.g., partner onboarding, interface
          and memoranda of understanding management; metadata and vocabulary maintenance;
          application programming interface change management).
          Cost buckets
          8.   The staffing and non‑labor drivers for each option are described using four cost
          buckets which range from one-off to recurring, applied consistently across options:
               (a) Build and configure (one‑off): architecture and design, development and
          configuration, templates and workflows setup, security baseline, initial integrations,
          content setup, testing and go‑live readiness:
               (b) Operations (recurring): hosting, DevSecOps, maintenance, monitoring,
          cybersecurity, backups, incident response and routine upgrades; and
                (c) Human support (recurring): helpdesk support, multilingual support approach,
          training and onboarding, moderation and curation, and facilitation support for key
          workflows.
                                                                                                     48/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


              (d) Interoperability lifecycle (recurring and periodic): partner onboarding,
          memoranda of understanding management, application programming interface change
          management, and standards and vocabulary maintenance.
          9.    User support and efforts to ensure correct and consistent use of the Mechanism are
          treated as core costs for the operation of the Mechanism, not optional add-ons.
          Baseline assumptions for comparability
          10 Given the uncertainties related to the modalities for the operation of the
          Mechanism, FTE estimates are provided as ranges and are accompanied by clear
          statements identifying the assumptions that most affect staffing requirements. For
          comparability across options, the following assumptions are applied:
                (a) Interoperability at the initial operationalization: assumed to rely primarily on
          link mode (i.e., authoritative links with standardized metadata). More complex
          interoperability (i.e., metadata harvesting and application programming interface
          federation) is treated as a tiered enhancement, which would require partner agreements,
          security arrangements, and ongoing change management.
                 (b) Multilingualism: multilingual navigation and core workflows are treated as a
          platform requirement, with a pragmatic approach that may include automation or
          artificial intelligence‑enabled translation for selected content types. It is not assumed
          that the secretariat will provide human translation for all submitted documents. Any
          human translation requirements mandated by the Conference of the Parties are identified
          as cost drivers with staffing implications.
               (c) Helpdesk: assumed to be business‑hours support via ticketing and email
          supplemented by scheduled onboarding and support clinics, with escalation pathways
          for deadline-sensitive requests. Expanded coverage models (e.g., regionalized desks,
          phone or application-based messaging channels, and extended hours) are treated as
          scalable enhancements with corresponding FTE impacts.
                (d) Volumes and throughput: submission and user volumes are not yet known.
          Accordingly, recurring support and moderation are estimated using volume bands and
          described in terms of, first, fixed baseline capacity, and second, variable capacity that
          scales with throughput.
                (e) Confidential or restricted content share: the Mechanism is assumed to be
          primarily open access, with some submissions requiring confidential or restricted
          handling and safeguards for traditional knowledge. If the share of confidential or
          restricted content is higher than assumed in practice, moderation, redaction, audit and
          governance workload scales non‑linearly and is treated as a material cost driver.
          Translating headcount into budget
          11. A monetary budget can be derived by applying loaded cost rates to each FTE
          category (e.g., United Nations staff grades, United Nations volunteers, consultants or
          vendor service contracts), together with non‑labor line items such as hosting, licenses,
          security testing, translation accessibility services. However, these rates and overhead
          assumptions vary substantially depending on the following factors:
                (a)   employment model (e.g., staff member, consultants or vendor-managed
          service);
               (b) level of experience of the given individual (estimates in this Study use
          average rates);
               (c)    hosting approach;
               (d)    multilingual policy;
               (e)    required support hours and training expectations;
                                                                                                       49/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


               (f)   volume of records; and
               (g)   the number and complexity of integrations.
          12. For this reason, the cost assessment focuses on headcount ranges, key non -labor
          cost drivers and cost incidence discussed in paragraph 2 above to provide a basis for
          budgeting.




                                                                                                  50/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


Appendix C
          Illustrative examples of functionalities for Options A through
          C
          1.   Table A below provides an illustrative example of how the functions of the
          Mechanism could be implemented under each of the three options described in the Study
          (Options A, B, and C).
          2.    Regarding cost considerations, differences between options are driven primarily
          by choices concerning oversight and management arrangements and the delivery
          modalities. Detailed resource requirements are therefore addressed separately through
          the accompanying analysis of full-time equivalent (FTE) and related narrative
          discussion. The table below does not prescribe a preferred configuration, nor should it
          be interpreted as a menu of independent features. Several functions are interdependent,
          and choices in one area may have implications for oversight and management
          arrangements, safeguards, confidentiality, or the integrity of the authoritative record in
          others.




                                                                                                       51/58
    ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
    9/3/26
         Table A.
         Illustrative example of how the functions of the Mechanism could be implemented under Options A to C
        Functions                          Option A (central system only)                                 Option B (central system + nodes)                             Option C (retrofitting existing platform)


User management          Approach: The central system manages user accounts,              Not a selectable option for this function:                       Approach: User management is handled through an
(roles, verification,    assigns roles, verifies authorized users, and records user       User management remains unchanged as Option A and is             existing platform’s account and access system, with BBNJ
audit)                   actions for oversight and review.                                handled entirely by the central system.                          user roles and verification requirements implemented
                         Pros: A single set of user roles and access rules, defined       Regional or subregional nodes would provide user support         within that platform’s existing structure.
                         and applied centrally.                                           or training without altering the IT design or responsibilities   Pros: Faster to implement if the platform already supports
                         Cons: Most user registration and verification tasks are          of the central system.                                           user approval, role assignment, and access records.
                         handled by the secretariat through the central system, and                                                                        Cons: The structure of user roles and access rules is limited
                         limit hands-on support at regional or subregional level.                                                                          by what the platform supports, and changes may require
                                                                                                                                                           platform-specific updates rather than simple adjustments by
                                                                                                                                                           the secretariat.
Submission and           Approach: The central system accepts submissions and             Approach: Submissions are prepared or checked with               Approach: Submission and publishing use an existing
publishing (forms,       publishes official records. Submission forms, document           support from regional or subregional nodes before being          platform’s workflow and document-handling tools, with
uploads, versioning)     uploads, validation, version control, and publication status     sent to the central system for publication. This staging may     BBNJ-specific forms and defined publication steps
                         are handled in one place.                                        be carried out using local systems, third-party tools, or        configured within that platform.
                         Pros: Reduces ambiguity on what constitutes the official         manual processes.                                                Pros: Faster to implement if the platform already supports
                         record and, therefore, the risk of inconsistent or conflicting   Pros: Reduces incomplete or incorrect submissions                structured submissions, versioning, and publication
                         submissions.                                                     reaching the central system and allows support to be             workflows.
                         Cons: All submission and publishing work is handled              provided closer to users.                                        Cons: Submission and publishing behavior is limited by
                         through the central system, placing operational                  Cons: Introduces additional coordination and workflow            what the platform can support, and additional configuration
                         responsibility on the secretariat.                               steps, which require clear rules and training to avoid delay     or customization may be needed to meet BBNJ-specific
                                                                                          or inconsistency.                                                requirements.

Search and retrieval     Approach: The central system provides search and                 Approach: The central system controls which records can          Approach: Search and record pages use an existing
(indexing, filters,      browsing for all records. Indexing, filtering, and record        be searched and how they are structured, while search            platform’s search and indexing features.
record pages)            views are handled directly within the central system.            access may be provided through regional, language-                Pros: Faster to implement if search and filtering are
                         Pros: The way a user searches is the same way for all            specific, or pillar-specific interfaces.                         already available.
                         records, reducing confusion about what users can see and         Pros: Users can find records through regional or pillar-          Cons: Search features are limited to what the platform
                         how they can find it.                                            specific interfaces users already use, without changing          supports, which may restrict filters, sorting, or geospatial
                          Cons: All search and browsing capacity must be provided         which system controls access and visibility.                     views, and adding new capabilities may require significant
                         by the central system, and more advanced features may             Cons: Clear rules are needed to keep external search            customization or may not be possible.
                         require additional development over time.                        interfaces in sync with the central system, so users do not
                                                                                          see outdated or partial records.
Notifications and        Approach: The central system controls when alerts are            Approach: The central system defines when alerts are             Approach: Use an existing platform’s alerting capability to
alerts (subscriptions,   triggered and sends notifications directly. Alerts are issued    triggered and may deliver alerts directly. Alerts may also be    implement the alert rules, triggers, and notification sending
digests, proximity)      for defined events such as submissions, updates, deadlines,      distributed through nodes or other external systems              within that platform.
                         and where applicable, based on agreed geographic criteria.       operating under central system rules, which relay the same       Pros: Faster implementation if alerting and geospatial
                         Pros: Alert timing and content are controlled in one place,      alerts to users without changing their timing or content.        features already exist which meet the BBNJ Agreement’s
                         reducing confusion about when and why notifications are          Pros: Allows alerts to reach users through regional or           requirements
                         sent.                                                            pillar-specific arrangements, rather than relying only on        Cons: Alert rules and triggers may be constrained by what
                         Cons: All alert delivery is handled by the central system,       central delivery.                                                the platform supports, and changes may require
                         with no regional or node-supported dissemination.                Cons: Clear rules are needed to ensure alerts distributed        customization or may not be possible.
                                                                                          through other systems remain timely and consistent.



                                                                                                                                                                                                              52/58
    ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
    9/3/26
       Functions                           Option A (central system only)                                 Option B (central system + nodes)                             Option C (retrofitting existing platform)


Confidentiality           Approach: The central system requires submitters to             Not a selectable option for this function:                       Approach: Confidentiality handling uses an existing
controls                  identify whether information is public, restricted, or          Confidentiality controls cannot be meaningfully distributed.     platform’s access controls, permission settings, and audit
(classification,          confidential at the time of submission. It applies access       Decisions on access restrictions, redaction, and handling of     features, with requirements specific to the BBNJ
redaction)                restrictions accordingly, and supports redaction for public     sensitive information must remain centralized to avoid           Agreement implemented within that platform.
                          release.                                                        inconsistent treatment or loss of control.                       Pros: Faster to implement if the platform already supports
                          Pros: Confidentiality rules and redaction practices can be                                                                       restricted access, redaction, and access logging.
                          defined and changed directly by the secretariat, without        Nodes may assist users in preparing submissions, but they        Cons: Confidentiality handling is limited by what the
                          relying on the constraints or upgrade cycles of an external     would not apply confidentiality decisions or control access      platform supports, and adapting it to needs specific to the
                          platform.                                                       to sensitive information.                                        BBNJ Agreement may require customization or may not be
                          Cons: All review and redaction are handled by the central                                                                        possible in all cases.
                          system, which may limit the ability to reflect local or
                          community context when handling sensitive information.

Low-connectivity          Approach: The central system is designed to be usable           Approach: The central system remains responsible for             Approach: Use an existing platform’s low-connectivity
accessibility             with slow or unreliable internet connections, using simple      records, while nodes help users work with limited                features such as offline use or delayed submission as the
                          pages and processes. All users interact directly with the       connectivity by allowing preparation and submission of           primary means of supporting users with limited or
                          central system.                                                 information when a stable connection is available.               unreliable internet access.
                          Pros: Keeps access and use of the Mechanism simple, with        Pros: Makes it easier for users with poor connectivity to        Pros: Faster to implement if the platform already supports
                          one system to maintain.                                         participate without needing continuous access to the central     use with limited or unreliable connectivity.
                          Cons: Users still need a live connection to the central         system.                                                          Cons: The level of low-connectivity support is limited to
                          system to submit or access information, with no offline or      Cons: Adds coordination work to ensure information               what the platform provides and may not align fully with
                          deferred submission option when connectivity is                 prepared through nodes is transferred correctly and on time.     user needs.
                          unavailable.

Notifications on          Approach: The central system receives notifications,            Not a selectable option for this function: The generation        Not a selectable option for this function: Reusing an
activities with respect   checks that required information is provided, generate the      of the “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier must be carried      existing platform does not remove the need to build a single
to marine genetic         “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier, and makes the             out by a single global system and cannot be distributed.         process for generating the “BBNJ” standardized batch
resources and digital     identifier publicly retrievable together with the official      Nodes may help users prepare notifications or reduce errors      identifier, identifier rules, and public lookup function.
sequence information      record relating to activities with respect to marine genetic    before submission, but it would not be advisable that they       These elements must still be implemented specifically for
and “BBNJ”                resources and digital sequence information.                     generate identifiers or control records relating to activities   the BBNJ Agreement, regardless of the underlying
standardized              Pros: Ensures a single, global unique identifier is issued      with respect to marine genetic resources and digital             platform.
identifier                and used consistently across all notifications and updates on   sequence information in the interest of the integrity of the
                          activities with respect to marine genetic resources and         process.
                          digital sequence information.
                          Cons: The issuance process must be reliable and
                          continuously available, and may require dedicated staffing,
                          especially if the process is not fully automated.




                                                                                                                                                                                                              53/58
    ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
    9/3/26
       Functions                          Option A (central system only)                                  Option B (central system + nodes)                           Option C (retrofitting existing platform)


Workflows relating to   Approach: The central system publishes proposals for the          Approach: The central system publishes and maintains the       Approach: Consultations on area-based management tools,
area-based              establishment of area-based management tools, including           official ABMT record. Nodes or other approved tools may        including marine protected areas, and document handling
management tools,       marine protected areas, consultation materials, decisions,        be used to support participation in consultations, with        use an existing platform’s consultation and record-
including marine        and updates. Record pages, version history, and key dates         inputs collected through those channels incorporated into      management features, adapted to reflect the stages and
protected areas         are managed in one place.                                         the central record.                                            publication requirements for area-based management tools,
                        Pros: All information and deadlines relating to area-based        Pros: Enables participation through tools and arrangements     including marine protected areas.
                        management tools, including marine protected areas, are           that stakeholders already use, while keeping one official      Pros: Quicker to implement if consultation workflows and
                        published through a single official record, making it clear       record relating to area-based management tools, including      version tracking are already available.
                        what is current and authoritative.                                marine protected areas.                                        Cons: The platform’s workflows may not fully match
                        Cons: All participation and consultation activity must occur      Cons: Clear procedures are needed to ensure inputs             processes relating to area-based management tools,
                        through the central system, which may face challenges for         collected outside the central system are complete and          including marine protected areas, under the BBNJ
                        effective engagement in contexts affected by connectivity         accurately reflected in the official record.                   Agreement and may require customization.
                        or capacity constraints.
Workflows relating to Approach: The central system manages the full                       Approach: The central system maintains the official            Approach: environmental impact assessment workflows
environmental impact environmental impact assessment process, including                   environmental impact assessment record and timeline.           use an existing platform’s consultation and document-
assessments           submissions, consultations, updates, and decisions. All             Nodes may support participation in consultations using         handling features, adapted to reflect the required EIA steps
                      information relating to environmental impact assessments is         their own tools, with inputs collected through those           and publication requirements.
                      maintained in a single record with a single timeline.               channels incorporated into the central record.                 Pros: Quicker to implement if consultation and document-
                      Pros: Keeps environmental impact assessment steps,                  Pros: Allows consultation support to be provided closer to     handling workflows already exist.
                      deadlines, and decisions clearly ordered in one place,              participants, which can improve engagement and the             Cons: The platform’s workflows may not fully match the
                      making the official process easy to follow.                         completeness of submissions.                                   environmental impact assessment processes under the
                      Cons: All consultation management and document                      Cons: Clear procedures are needed to ensure inputs             BBNJ Agreement and may require customization.
                      handling are concentrated in the central system, which can          gathered outside the central system are complete and
                      be difficult to manage for long, document-heavy, or high-           accurately reflected in the official environmental impact
                      volume environmental impact assessment processes.                   assessment record.
Matching of capacity-   Approach: The central system hosts a single register of           Approach: The central system maintains the official            Approach: Capacity-building and transfer of marine
building needs with     capacity-building needs and offers, matches needs with            register of needs and offers. Nodes may use their own tools    technology needs and offers are managed using an existing
the support available   offers, and produces related summaries and reports.               to help gather and present information, with the results       platform’s needs-and-offers features, adapted to reflect the
and with providers      Pros: All needs and offers are listed and matched in one          entered into the central register.                             Agreement’s categories and reporting requirements.
for the transfer of     place using the same categories, making results easy to           Pros: Information can be collected and support provided at     Pros: Quicker to implement if the platform already
marine technology       compare and report.                                               the regional and local levels, which can improve the clarity   supports collecting needs, listing offers, and matching them.
                        Cons: How needs and offers are described and matched is           and usefulness of needs and offers.                            Cons: How needs and offers can be described, matched,
                        set centrally, which can limit tailoring to regional or sector-   Cons: Clear procedures are needed to ensure information        and reported may be limited by the platform. Customization
                        specific contexts.                                                collected through nodes is complete and entered                may be required and may not be possible in all cases.
                                                                                          consistently in the central register.




                                                                                                                                                                                                            54/58
    ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
    9/3/26
       Functions                    Option A (central system only)                                Option B (central system + nodes)                              Option C (retrofitting existing platform)


Interoperability   Approach: The central system connects to external systems      Approach: For selected external databases, the central            Not a selectable option for this function: Interoperability
                   using links only. For each external database, the central      system goes beyond links and automatically retrieves or           choices are made per external database (link-only versus
                   system provides a reference and directs users to view          exchanges information using agreed data feeds or system-          automated exchange). Reusing an existing platform cannot
                   information at the source.                                     to-system connections. This choice is made on a database-         remove or replace these decisions and does not constitute a
                   Pros: Lowest dependency and fastest to implement across        by-database basis.                                                separate interoperability design.
                   many external systems.                                         Pros: Allows tighter integration and reduces manual effort
                   Cons: Information remains distributed across systems, and      for users where external systems support automated
                   users must move between sources to view or compare data.       exchange.
                                                                                  Cons: Requires agreements, technical alignment, and
                                                                                  ongoing coordination for each external database that uses
                                                                                  this approach.


Traditional        Approach: The central system sets the rules for when           Approach: The central system sets the rules for when              Approach: Traditional knowledge requests and access are
knowledge          traditional knowledge may be shared and handles all            traditional knowledge may be shared. Nodes support                handled using an existing platform’s built-in request and
                   requests to view it. By default, records indicate the          communication with communities, help explain the process,         access features, adapted to follow the BBNJ Agreement’s
                   existence of the knowledge without revealing its content.      and assist with requests. Sensitive information may remain        requirements.
                   Pros: Rules for sharing traditional knowledge are applied in   with node-supported arrangements, while the central system        Pros: Faster to implement if the platform already supports
                   one place, reducing the risk of inconsistent or accidental     records whether consent exists.                                   access requests and restricted viewing.
                   sharing.                                                       Pros: Support can take place closer to communities while          Cons: Some platform features may need adjustment to
                   Cons: Handling all requests through the central system can     the rules for sharing remain the same everywhere.                 reflect consent requirements and handling practices under
                   be distant from communities and may require extra effort to    Cons: Clear boundaries are needed so community support            the BBNJ Agreement.
                   reflect local language and cultural practices.                 does not result in different sharing rules in different places.




                                                                                                                                                                                                       55/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


          3.   Below is an illustrative example of a hybrid configuration using the functions
          discussed in table A above to demonstrate how elements of Options A to C can be
          combined to meet the baseline requirements:
                (a) User management: Option C (retrofit an existing platform for login, role
          assignment and access records if it can implement roles and the approval steps of the
          secretariat required under the BBNJ Agreement);
               (b) Submission and publishing: Option A (keep submission and published
          records in the central system to ensure a single official record of what is submitted,
          changed and published);
               (c) Search and retrieval: Option C (retrofit an existing platform for search and
          record pages, provided it can support the needed record structure, filters and, if required,
          geospatial views);
                (d) Notifications and alerts: Option B (keep alert triggers defined centrally, but
          allow nodes, and other external systems operating under central system rules, to
          distribute the same alerts to users);
               (e) Confidentiality controls: Option A (keep access restriction and redaction
          handled through the central system to ensure that the handling of sensitive and/or
          confidential information does not vary by location);
               (f) Low-connectivity accessibility: Option B (use nodes to support offline
          preparation and deferred submission once a stable connection is available, without
          changing where records are published and maintained);
                (g) Notifications on activities with respect to marine genetic resources and
          digital sequence information and the “BBNJ” standardized batch identifier: Option A
          (keep the generation of identifier and the public lookup function in the central system,
          as a single central issuer is required, while nodes can help reduce errors before
          submission);     (h) Workflows relating to area-based management tools, including
          marine protected areas: Option B (keep the official record and key dates in the central
          system, while using nodes to support consultation participation and ensure inputs are
          incorporated into the central record);
                (i) Workflows relating to environmental impact assessments: Option B (keep the
          official record and timeline in the central system, while using nodes to support
          consultation participation and improve the completeness of inputs);
                (j) Matching of capacity-building needs with the support available and with
          providers for the transfer of marine technology: Option B (keep the official register of
          needs, opportunities and providers in the central system, while using nodes to help
          Parties and stakeholders describe needs, opportunities and providers clearly to support
          effective matching);
                (k) Interoperability: Option B (determine interoperability on a platform-by-
          platform basis, with link-only approaches applying more broadly, while automated
          exchange being limited to a small set of priority external platforms where it is feasible
          and justified by the coordination efforts required); and
                (l). Traditional knowledge: Option B (keep the rules for when traditional
          knowledge may be shared defined centrally, while using nodes for communication and
          facilitation closer to communities).
          4.   An illustrative hybrid configuration such as the example in paragraph 3 above
          could entail an indicative level of effort in the range of approximately 3 to 6 FTE over
          a year for the IT architectural design and build, with additional effort by the secretariat
          on coordination where nodes are deployed and separately staffed and coordination
          between the IT team and relevant stakeholders.

                                                                                                         56/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


Appendix D
          Examples of costs associated with the operationalization of the
          Mechanism
          1.    Certain human resources may be required within the secretariat to support the
          operationalization of the Mechanism. It is noted that: first, some roles may be combined;
          second, some roles may have responsibilities beyond the Mechanism; and third, some
          roles may be supported through nodes where nodes are used. Indicative roles that may
          be required, on either a full-time or part-time basis, include:
                (a) Programme manager: Overall management of Phase 1 delivery, including
          prioritization and sequencing of work, coordination across policy, technical and
          operational streams, supporting any oversight arrangements, budget planning and
          management, and reporting to the Conference of the Parties and subsidiary bodies;
               (b) Interoperability officer: Coordination with relevant instruments, frameworks
          and bodies, other clearing-house mechanisms and information-sharing platforms,
          repositories and databases, including early alignment on interfaces, identifiers and
          information-sharing arrangements;
                (c) Legal officer: Management of confidentiality classifications, data-sharing
          arrangements, and legal and procedural compliance, including support related to external
          services and contractual arrangements;
               (d) Traditional knowledge officer: Management of safeguards for traditional
          knowledge, including consent metadata, and access conditions, and coordination with
          Indigenous Peoples and local communities on processes;
               (e) Accessibility officer: Ensuring system design and delivery reflect
          connectivity constraints and accessibility needs, particularly for least developed
          countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, including
          providing guidance to the technical teams and external service providers;
                (f) Capacity-building and transfer of marine technology officer: Design of initial
          workflows, templates and guidance, and preparation for needs assessment and matching
          functions;
               (g) Information systems officer: Technical management of the Mechanism
          during build and early operations, including coordination with external IT service
          providers, security and hosting arrangements, system availability, configuration
          management, and go-live readiness;
                (h) Administrative officer: Administrative and operational support, including
          processing of administrative actions, contract administration, scheduling, travel
          logistics, and coordination of documentation; and
                 (i) User support and data operations officer: Helpdesk and onboarding support,
          first-line user assistance, routine verification and quality checks on submissions, and
          operational support during initial use of the Mechanism.
          2.    Non-post administrative resources may include costs associated with office space,
          furniture and IT equipment (e.g., laptop or desktop computers).
          3.    Complex IT projects such as the Mechanism typically require a team of IT
          professionals with a range of complementary skills. While the titles may vary and the
          functions may be combined, the following roles reflect the types of expertise that are
          typically required:
                (a) Product manager: Overall responsibility for delivery, scope control,
          prioritization, timelines, and coordination between technical workstreams;
                                                                                                      57/58
ADVANCE, UNEDITED VERSION
9/3/26


               (b) Technical lead and Solution architect: Overall system design, technology
          choices, security baseline, integration approach and ensuring that the architecture
          supports agreed requirements;
                (c) User experience and service designer: Design of user journeys, submission
          flows, alerts, and accessibility-by-design features, informed by representative user needs
          rather than detailed policy ownership;
                (d) Software engineers (front-end and back-end): Implementation of core
          workflows, submission forms, search and retrieval, alerts, and basic interoperability
          features required for initial operationalization;
                (e) Data and systems analyst: Definition of data models, metadata fields,
          identifiers and validation logic required for consistent records and future interoperability ;
                (f) Documentation and requirements specialist: Preparation of functional
          specifications, user guidance and technical documentation to support implementation,
          testing and handover;
               (g) Development operations and cloud operations specialist: Setup and operation
          of hosting environments, deployment pipelines, monitoring, backups and basic
          operational resilience for go-live; and
               (h) Security specialist: Security review of architecture and implementation,
          including access control, data handling, and basic penetration testing.
          4.    The expertise referred to in paragraph 3 above may be sourced through different
          arrangements, including through engaging consultants or individual contractors, or
          through procurement of a bundled external service. A bundled external service may, in
          some cases, reduce the administrative burden on the secretariat, including in relation to
          recruitment, contracting, payments and supervision. Under such an arrangement,
          responsibility for coordination within the IT team would typically rest with the service
          provider, not the secretariat. At the same time, engaging consultants or individual
          contractors may, in some cases, offer greater flexibility and continuity.
          5.    Other IT-related costs associated with supporting infrastructure and external
          services may include cloud hosting and storage, development and test environments,
          security services, software licenses or managed services, backup and monitoring, and
          other infrastructure needed for system operation.
          6.   Other relevant costs may include:
               (a) Translation costs: the range of costs would depend on the extent to which the
          Mechanism and the documents housed in the Mechanism will be multilingual and their
          volume.
               (b) Costs related to oversight arrangements: e.g., intergovernmental or expert
          meetings or workshops, either with or without document translation and interpretation.
               (c) Engagement costs: e.g., communication with stakeholders; outreach to raise
          awareness, which may include workshops, either with or without document translation
          and interpretation, webinars, and information materials.




                                                                                                           58/58
